
ISLAMABAD, JAN. 2. The Harkat-ul-Mujahideen, a Pakistan-based militant outfit, was responsible for the eight-day-long hijack of Indian Airlines Flight IC-814 which ended in Kandahar on Saturday, information exclusively made available to The Hindu said.
With this information, it is clear that the individual identities of the hijackers, though important, are not as significant as the identity of the group which was behind the daring operation.
Highly-placed sources also said the operation was meticulously planned over two years in order to ensure that nothing went wrong. This information tallies with the hijackers' inordinate interest in freeing Maulana Masood Azhar, an ideologue of the Harkat-ul-Ansar, as the Harkat-ul-Mujahideen was previously known.
In fact, on the second day of the hijacking, the only demand that was made was for Masood Azhar's release. It was only later when the Indian negotiation team opened talks with the hijackers did the demand for the release of 35 additional militants surface.
Given that finally the hijackers agreed to only Masood Azhar, plus two, shows the importance this man holds for the Harkat-ul- Mujahideen, which figures in the list of terrorist organisations of the U.S. State Department.
According to background information released by the State Department's Office of Counter-terrorism, on October 8, 1999, the Harkat leader, Fazlur Rehman Khalil, had been linked to Osama bin Laden, wanted for terrorist activities by the U.S. The Harkat operates ``terrorist training camps in eastern Afghanistan and suffered casualties in the U.S. missile strikes on Bin Laden- associated training camps in Khost (Afghanistan) in August 1998''.
The group has several thousand armed supporters in Pakistan- Occupied Kashmir, Pakistan, India's southern Kashmir and the Doda region. ``Supporters are mostly Pakistanis and Kashmiris, also include Afghans and Arab veterans of the Afghan war.'' According to the paper, the group had ``conducted a number of operations against Indian troops and civilian targets in Kashmir'' and was linked to the Al-Faran, which kidnapped five Western tourists in July 1995.
