
NEW DELHI, JAN. 1. Though the relief team of doctors and para- medical staff was on stand-by since December 27 at Kandahar airport in Afghanistan, they could examine the passenger of the hijacked plane only an hour before the hostages left for Delhi on Friday evening.
``The hijackers largely relied on in-flight doctors and though we were on stand-by, our services were requisitioned only at the last minute,'' the doctors who returned with the hostages told The Hindu here today. ``We went inside the aircraft only after the hijackers left,'' the doctors revealed.
The relief team had three doctors and one pharmacist from Indian Airlines (IA), three doctors and a nurse from the Airports Authority of India (AAI), and one from the Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS). The IA doctors were Dr. Bhagia, Dr. Swadhani and Dr. Vineeta Vishwabandhu. The AAI team was led by Dr. Arora. The CGHS doctor was Dr. Vishal Sharma.
``We had very little interaction with the passengers after their release and before they boarded the return plane. Throughout the week, only the doctors on board took care of the hostages,'' said Dr. Chawla, another AAI doctor who formed part of the relief team.
``It was around 5-35 p.m. on Friday evening that we went inside the aircraft to see the passengers. That was after the hijackers had left. None of the hostages had any serious problems but we administered medical aid to those who required them,'' Dr. Chawla said.
The in-flight doctors gave a list of medicines required to the Red Cross and no doctor went inside the aircraft. Doctors from the International Committee of the Red Cross were also not allowed inside, Dr. Chawla added.
Except for two passengers, none of them really had any serious health problem. One of them was of course the cancer patient, Simon Berar, who was allowed to be taken to hospital on December 30. ``The other was a 14-year-old kid who had some kidney problem. He sustained on IV fluid given by the doctors inside the aircraft,'' said Dr. Arora, who headed the AAI contingent.
Both doctors said the two medicos - Dr. Anita Joshi from Naini Tal and Dr. Jagdish Tyagi from Meerut - did commendable work in treating the hostages on board. ``The complaints which we attended to during the one hour that we spent with the hijackers were cold, sore throat and diarrohea,'' Dr. Arora informed.
Giving information about the role played by Indian Airlines doctors, Dr. P. K. Jayachand, Director (Medical Services), said they had two doctors on the first relief plane which went to Kandahar on December 25. ``We were not allowed to give medicines to the hostages,'' said Dr. Vishwabandhu.
