
VELLORE, JAN. 2. Scenes of jubilation were witnessed on Sunday in the house of the seven passengers hailing from Vellore district who were aboard the hijacked IC 814 Kathmandu-Delhi plane, following their safe return from the seven-day ordeal. They were greeted by their family members with traditional `aarthi' and sweets. There was a steady stream of relatives and friends too, enquiring about their health.
The seven, who returned to Vellore by 1-15 a.m. were mobbed by mediapersons at the house of Mr. C. Gnanasekharan, Vellore MLA.
The ``total lack of security'' at the Kathmandu airport was the root cause for the hijacking episode, according to Mr. S. Dhanasekhar, one of the seven passengers. He said the airport in Kathmandu resembled a bus stand in Tamil Nadu and he and other passengers boarded the plane to Delhi on December 24 just as they would board any bus, without security check.
In fact, he and his friends, on boarding the plane were discussing the ``total lack of security'' and saying that it would be easy for any armed terrorist to get into the plane unchecked and hijack it. ``Little did we realise then that this joke would become a reality within minutes of take-off'', he said. In contrast, the security at the Varanasi airport where they boarded the plane to Nepal about five days earlier was very tight.
``It was nothing short of hell'', Mr. Dhanasekhar said when asked to describe the week-long ordeal. The hostages were virtually starved by the hijackers who made every two passengers to share a glass of water and an orange daily. Even the food meant for one person had to be shared by two.
Mr. Kulasekharan of Chinnanganallur village near Anaicut said that he and other able-bodied persons were hustled into the cabin and beaten up immediately after the hijack in order to strike terror into their minds and prevent them from offering resistance to the hijackers.
Asked why one of the hostages, Rupin Katyal, was killed, Mr. Dhanasekhar and Mr. Prasad Babu, another passenger, said he must have been stabbed when he offered resistance. None of them, however saw the incident.
With the hijackers telling them on the second day that they were going to kill all the hostages, 10 at a time in view of the ``failure'' of the talks with the Indian Government, they thought they would never be able to meet their relatives. ``Indeed, it is a miracle that we are alive today'', said the hostages who attributed it to the prayers of the well- wishers.
Mr. Dhanasekhar was all praise for Dr. Anitha Joshy, an Indian doctor among the passengers who provided treatment to the sick inside the plane, along with a French doctor and an Indian male doctor, in the light of the refusal of the hijackers to allow any medical team from outside to enter the plane. ``We were all worried when Dr. Anitha herself fell sick and had to be attended by the other two doctors'', he said.
Mr. V. Perumal, who was not present during the press conference, told this reporter at his house that their experience was akin to being in an intensive care unit of a hospital, with the hostages starved of food for a full 24 hours when the hijackers were informed about a deadlock in the talks. Whenever a plane passed by, the hijackers used to shout, `heads down and eyes close', forcing the passengers to bend and close their eyes. ``We saw the sun only after our release, for the hijackers did not allow us even to open the windows of the plane.''
The hostages had a word of praise for Mr. Dev Sharan, captain of the plane, for his deft dealing with the hijackers in order to ensure the safety of the passengers. Any wrong approach or a harsh word from the captain would have made matters worse, Mr. Dhanasekaran said.
Asked whether he thought that the Government was right in releasing the three terrorists from jails, as demanded by the hijackers, Mr. Dhanasekhar justified the Government move saying that it would have been criminal to have allowed the innocent hostages to be killed for no fault of theirs by refusing to yield to the demands of the hijackers.
