
CHENNAI, JAN. 4. The handsome Spaniard Carlos Moya and Chennai seems to have a strange relationship, not the kind his adoring fans would have liked. His second visit to this city has ended in a disaster for this one- time World No. 1. The great player has withdrawn because of a recurrence of a back discomfort.
Last year he arrived here having just tasted the number one status. Fittingly he was even given the special honour of an elephant ride, much to the delight of his fans. `King Carlos' had arrived then. But no sooner had the crowd begun to savour the top players' awesome court presence than came the unexpected in the quarterfinal against Rainer Schuttler. Moya developed blisters on his playing hand thumb and made the shocking decision to concede the tie. His fans were desolate.
This time Moya made a quiet entry. The man himself has been relatively silent on the international scene having suffered a stress fracture of his back during the US Open and since then had taken a long lay-off. ``I thought that was over when I had a serious practice session here yesterday. However, this morning I again felt a soreness in my back and decided I could not risk an injury right at the start of the season,'' he told a big gathering of mediapersons at a news conference here on Tuesday, the sense of disappoint quite vivid on his face.
Only minutes earlier he had walked on to the centre court to the cheers all round, only to bring about instant silence with his admission that he was ``not playing and sorry for the disappointment. Thank you for supporting me. I shall be back next year.''
To the mediapersons he was not going to make a definite statement, though as he put it, ``I would love to come. People have been so nice to me. Besides, I have not been able to give them good tennis. Last time it was my thumb, this time it is my back and I hope next time I can give them my best form,'' he said.
Moya said he had always been an optimist but the recent happenings had shaken him. ``My concern now is to be healthy and I am not bothered whether I am number 5 or 10 or 20 in the world. I always believe in playing only when I am 100 per cent fit. That is my only concern now, to be fit, to be healthy,'' he said with a tinge of sadness.
He was clear that at the moment he was going to talk of the tournaments ahead, including the Australian Open.
``I am flying to Sydney tomorrow. I shall see if I am in a position to play there and then decide on my future.''
At the moment, as he understandably put it, ``I must check how bad this fresh development on my back is,'' he said. And for once the smile was missing on the Spaniard's face, only lines of pain and disappointment.
