
JAMMU, JAN. 2. The release of two top militant leaders from the Kotbhalwal sub-jail in Jammu and the Central Jail Srinagar, has generated much debate with legal experts saying that no norms were followed and that the exercise was ``illegal'', carried out ``under pressure'' and done in a hush-hush manner.
The State Governmentsaid it would be wrong to release the militants as it would be against the ``national interests''. The Chief Minister, Dr. Farooq Abdullah, in an interview, also denied having any role in freeing seven militants in exchange for Dr. Rubiya Sayeed, the daughter of the former Union Home Minister, Mufti Mohammad Sayeed.
It is reliably learnt that the chief of the Research and Analysis Wing (RAW), Mr. A. S. Dulat, flew down here to convince Dr. Abdullah and others. A ``personal friend'' of the Chief Minister, he held a detailed meeting with him and the Governor, Mr. G. C. Saxena, and apprised them about the Centre's ``compulsion'' in taking this decision.
Even otherwise, the State police had failed to prove any case against the Harkat-ul-Ansar general secretary, Moulana Masood Azhar, as also the chief commander of Al-Umar-Mujahideen, Mushtaq Zargar.
Legal experts, point out that the manner in which these two were moved from the State jails has put a question mark on the functioning of the system. The prison department did not receive any official communication from any State or Central agency to release Masood. ``We have not received any communication but there were verbal orders from the State Government to hand him over to the police,'' a senior prison official told TheHindu, pleading anonymity. What was done to the cases pending against him is not known.
In the case of Mushtaq Ahmed Zargar, a senior lawyer of the J&K High Court said his being taken to Kandahar was ``illegal'' as the court, was not informed and no permission was sought. But the Minister of State for Home, Mr. Mushtaq Ahmed Lone, said ``all procedural formalities were complied with'', without elaborating.
