
NEW DELHI, JAN. 1.The food tasted good. Brought specially for Mr. L.N. Gupta from his hometown near Alwar in Rajasthan, this was the first morsel of grain that had gone down his throat after seven days. Mr. Gupta, a passenger of the hijacked plane, at one point had lost all hope of meeting his relatives again.
``The food they gave us was bad. It was stale and tasteless. The very look of it made me feel queasy. My wife and I never touched that food even once.''
It was all very unfortunate from the beginning. Minutes after the food packets were served, he said, the hijackers came out with a pistol in one hand and a grenade in the other and announced that the plane had been hijacked. Passengers were blindfolded and it was only four days later that Mr. Gupta got to see the inside of the plane.
``All this story of landing in Lahore and Dubai is news to me. I did not even know that we were in Kandahar till the fourth day. It was as if the world was closed for all that time. All I remember is that we were hijacked somewhere near Lucknow.''
Mr. Gupta also remembers the plane landing at Amritsar for refuelling. There was panic in their voice from the moment the aircraft landed at Amritsar. ``Suddenly one of them (hijackers) shouted that commandos were coming from the back in jeeps and then they told the pilot to take-off. That was the only time they panicked. Otherwise they were in total control.''
The hijackers, Mr. Gupta said, told them by the third day that the Government of India was not concerned about the passengers' lives.
Later, they said the Afghan Government was mediating with India and all hopes of release depended on the Taliban.
On the killing of Rippan Katyal, Mr. Gupta said very few knew about it on the flight. In fact, it was on the third day that one of the persons sitting next to Mr. Gupta whispered to him that the hijackers had killed one man.
The hijackers, Mr. Gupta said, had a good physique and were well- educated. ``They spoke in English, Hindi and Kashmiri. They called themselves Kashmiri freedom fighters and never missed an opportunity to remind us about the `gruesome' activities of the Indian Army in the Valley.''
