
JAMMU, JAN. 3. At least 16 people, including two security force personnel, were killed and 23 injured in a powerful mine blast in the Sabzimandi area here on Monday morning.
According to reports, the blast took place at about 9- 50 a.m. in the crowded Sabzimandi area near Batamaloo bus stand. The city police chief, Dr. B. Sirinivas, said that the mine, planted in a hand cart in the vegetable market, exploded with a big bang killing 14 people on the spot. ``Among those killed were two jawans of the Special Security Bureau (SSB). Five BSF personnel were among the injured. The rest were civilians.''
The area has been cordoned off by the security forces. Sources said that the mine, which had a timer device, was detonated with a remote control. Some shops and vehicles were completely destroyed in the blast, which was heard in a radius of 4 km, reports reaching here said.
An eyewitness said that the site of blast wore a ghastly look as blood was splattered in the area. Bodies were thrown hundreds of metres away with the impact of blast. Security personnel fired in panic, which led to people running helter skelter. The traffic came to a halt.
The IGP Kashmir range, Dr. Ashok Bhan, and other senior civil and police officers rushed to the spot to supervise rescue operations.
The injured were shifted to different hospitals in the city. The condition of many of the injured was critical, sources said, adding that two of them succumbed to their injuries on way to the hospital. Some of the deceased have been identified as Ghulam Mohiuddin, Ghulam Rasool, Ghulam Nabi, Abdul Majid, Mohammad Ayub Mir, Mushtaq Bhat, Parvez Sofi, Irshad Ahmed, Ghulam Mohammad Bangroo, Abdul Majid and Ali Mohammed. The SSB personnel who died were S. Bir and Tonka Chanderwan.
A red alert has been sounded in the city and search operations launched. Dr. Sirinivas said that searches were being conducted in Noorbagh and other localities but no arrests had been made. No militant outfit has claimed responsibility.
Militants last night attempted to storm an Army camp in Kreeri village of Baramulla district. Police sources said that some militants fired towards the camp and tried to enter it but the forces foiled their attempt. Three Army personnel were reported to have been injured in the action.
UNI reports from New Delhi:
The Ministry of Home Affairs today reviewed the overall security situation in Srinagar. An official spokesman said that since no group had claimed responsibility for the blast, investigations had started to trace the persons responsible and their modus operandi.
The State Government was making arrangements for the prompt payment of ex-gratia to the next of the kin of the deceased, he added.
