
NIZAMABAD, JAN 2. The district police have apprehended nine persons belonging to Poonch district of Jammu and Kashmir after they were found moving under suspicious circumstances in Nizamabad town.
A patrol party of the Nizamabad police came across some persons getting down from autorickshaws in the early hours of Saturday in the Ahmadipura locality. The police, suspecting their movements, took them for questioning to the Two Town police station. The nine persons reportedly told the police that they hailed from Sangla and Gunthal villages of Surankot taluk of Poonch district.
The Superintendent of police, Dr. Ravi Shankar Ayyanar, when contacted by The Hindu on Sunday, identified the nine persons as Mohd. Ismail (38), Fazal Hussain (25), Shoukath Hussain (21), all residents of Gunthal village, Surankot, Abdul Rasheed (34), Mohd. Rasheed (40), Javeed Iqbal (26), Abdul Shakoor (25), Abdul Hameed (25) and Mohd. Aslam (32), all of Sangla village in Surankot.
The nine claimed they had come here to collect donations for the maintenance of a religious institution going by the name `Madrasa-Islamia-Nizimiya-Razviya-Sultania, Jama Masjid, Surankot'. Verification of their belongings revealed that they carried some receipts of the said school and identity cards issued by the Surankot police but the validity of which had expired in 1997.
The police were baffled as to why these people, belonging to Gujjar community, who are shepherds by profession and who stay in the hilly tracts of Jammu and Kashmir, would come all the way to Nizamabad to collect donations in the name of a religious institution.
The police also do not rule out the intentions of subversive forces conducting a survey to select soft areas for long-term plans to foment trouble. The versions given by them has not convinced the police. They said about a hundred of them belonging to Surankot had first come to Bhopal (Madhya Pradesh), from where they visited the Mecca Masjid in Hyderabad. From there, nine of them boarded a train to come to Nizamabad, after being told that the Muslim population here is high. At least two of them maintained they had visited Nizamabad last year too.
With Nizamabad already having been identified as a potential place for ISI activities, the police do not want to take any chance. The SP, immediately after arresting the nine Kashmiris, informed the IG (Intelligence), about the issue. He said a fax message has already been sent to the IG (Jammu zone) and DIG, Poonch-Rajouri sector, seeking their help in knowing the antecedents of the persons.
Pak. nationals overstaying
In the meantime, the police also came across 11 Pakistani nationals overstaying in the town. Ten of them are married women who have been staying here for last four to five years, and nine belong to Karachi.
