
PATNA, JAN. 2. Even as the Election Commission directed the Union Home Ministry to adequately deploy Central forces at least one month ahead of the Assembly elections in Bihar, the State Government too has placed its demand with the Centre for sending at least 800 companies of para-military forces for maintaining law and order during the polls.
The actions of the EC and State Government coming at the same time may be a coincidence. By their action both the EC and the State Government have obviously sought to take pre-emptive measure to avoid the embarrassment they had to face during the recently concluded Lok Sabha elections, thanks to the action of the then Acting Governor.
The former Governor, Mr. B. M. Lal, the then Chief Justice of the Patna High Court, had shot off a letter to the Union Home Ministry immediately after the first round of elections that left 38 police and civil personnel dead, in which he expressed his displeasure over the failure of the EC to ensure proper security arrangement which he held as responsible for these killings.
Mr. Lal and the EC had been at loggerheads over the issue with the latter objecting to the former's uncalled for interventions in seeking transfer of officials. The RJD too had cried foul at Mr. Lal's action in writing to the Union Home Ministry against a Constitutional body.
The EC has cited the killings during the Lok Sabha elections and called for proper reinforcement of the police force to avoid the recurrence of similar incidents during the Assembly elections.
The State Government, likewise, has taken the plea that it needed at least 800 companies of para-military forces to tackle the naxalite menace and the ISI threat perception which have hogged the limelight in the wake of the hijacking of the Indian Airlines aircraft from Kathmandu.
In all, 54 people were killed during the three-phase Lok Sabha elections, of which 49 were police and civil officials on election duty. As a matter of fact, 41 of them were killed by the naxalites who had used landmines to attack the police and poll parties in violence-prone districts of south and central Bihar. The naxalites had given a call for poll boycott and attacked the patrol parties to enforce their decision.
Though turned out to be so bad for the police, including the para-military forces, of course, that special arrangements had to be made later in about 80 booths of the worst affected districts of Palamu, Chatra and Hazaribagh district. The naxalite outfits had thwarted polling process at three booths on the scheduled day.
The Centre, in view of Kargil developments, had provided just about 130 companies of para-military forces for the Lok Sabha elections as against the demand for 600 companies by the State Government. The State Government deployed its own forces and the Home Guards to supplement the Central forces made available to it.
While the State Government has been saved of the major problem of floods which it had to cope with during the Lok Sabha elections, its task during the Assembly elections has been made difficult by a series of fresh developments.
Apart from the need to check ISI activities across the 800 km Indo-Nepal border, the naxalite menace too has become serious. While the MCC might have stepped up its attacks in view of the approaching Assembly elections, the PWG, which too is opposed to the elections, has gone on the offensive to avenge the killings of its three top leaders in Andhra Pradesh.
The MCC carried out two massacres recently killing at least 12 people, including six police personnel. On the other hand, the PWG has been targeting railway property, in particular, besides State Government buildings at the block level.
The naxalite outfits attacked the police during elections in a big way during the 1998 Lok Sabha elections when 44 people had been killed, of which eight were police personnel.
Adding to the State Government's worries was the recent call given by the Ranbir Sena, the private army of upper caste feudal Bhumihars, threatening to avenge the Senari carnage in which 35 Bhumihars were killed by the MCC.
