
MUMBAI
WITH A DOZEN aspiring for honours in the Pratap Stud Million, a event for two year olds, it was difficult to pick the winner.
Though Allaire, the chestnut daughter of Razeen, bred at the Mehra Stud, was the cynosure, to support her chances against Victory March, Gironde and Anna Pavlova in the betting ring was beyond the reach of a common punter. No doubt, there were many ardent followers of Aslam Khader who said that ``Aslam thy name is success''. Many a time, these followers prove right and reap good harvest.
Allaire who was badly pocketed after passing the bend caused anxious moments, but Aslam without losing cool and using his skill sent her through the gap between Batalik (P. Shroff up) and Gironde (M. Narredu astride) to achieve the desired result.
``Despite my rough passage at the bend, I had full confidence in Allaire's ability to win the race. With this run she should prove her worth in future '' said Aslam Khader.
Victory March, despite looking well groomed ran below expectations. ``My charge, Victory March found the trip very sharp. She had finished second in a mock race over 1200m. This run suggested that she would be more useful over 1200 or 1400m trip,'' said trainer Narendra Lagad. Anna Pavlova who ran fifth bled through her nostrils.
Jockey C. Rajendra's excessive and merciless use of the whip on Topaz in the straight certainly might have met the probing eyes of the Stipes when he steered her to victory in the opener.
The public choice, North American's powerful run in the hands of B. Prakash, in the straight when he was about to peg back Hope and surge forward to have his say at the wire, broke his blood vessel. At this juncture, Topaz came with big strides and earned a winning bracket.
``After watching Picasso's last third in Pune and his track performances, Picasso seems to be a lazy type and he runs far better in front but fails to improve if ridden from behind and that was why, we removed blinkers and sent him from start to finish in this race. Our well planned strategy paid dividends when he won with some measure of comfort,'' said Mr. Vivek Jain one of the joint owners of Picasso. S. S. Bhati's riding on Phalaenopsis, keeping her far behind at the crucial stage of the race, looked unhelpful in the saddle.
Despite the step up in class and 6.5 kgs penalty, Prince Nicholas displayed that he was the best sprinter in Western India when he easily decimated his rivals.
One knowledgeable racegoer said that ``this nimble footed son of Cristofori should have been allowed to run from start to finish to see how much time he takes to cover the 1000m trip. His success today with 53.5 kgs clearly demonstrated that Prince Nicholas would be the prime favourite in the Sprinters Cup at Calcutta''.
After winning a race and claiming minor slots twice at Delhi, Great Investment had struck a rich form in Western India since his first victory in Pune. His consecutive three wins since last Pune season proved that this son of Libor has been getting perkier and perkier with every race. Great Investment defied the Handicapper for the fourth time. His manner of success with top weight in class II boosted the hopes of his connections to run him against Saddle Up in the Eclipse Stakes Of India billed for Jan. 16. Ms. Arti Doctor deserves kudos for keeping Great Investment in good condition.
The Sunderji trained Taj Mahal had no difficulty in scoring an encore under C. Rajendra. Chelsea's third should be taken with a pinch of salt. She should be reassessed when she runs in future.
The least expected Pussy Cat from Magansingh Jodha yard and Suresh Chavan's Hailstorm came from the rear positions to win their respective races and caused a big dent in the permutations of pool hunters.
Thin fields
Except for the last race, the others had small fields, the reason being racing held on the All Weather track. A few trainers had this to say: ``Our horses are not used to this track. This track is very popular abroad and we feel with the passage of time many professionals would opt for racing on this track''.
When the Handicapper Mr. R. M. Seth was asked why a race was not framed for two year olds he said that ``For Thursday's races, I framed the race thrice but only five horses were entered and according to the rule, we needed six runners. When the trainers were unable to give us one more runner, we decided to cancel the race for 2 year olds.''
Tap On Power's price drifting from 5 to 2 to 10 to 1 in the betting ring was the talk around. Those who follow course information backed Azurica and left Robert D'Mellow's ward Tap On Power unconsidered. From the way Sunny Chinoy, was guiding the fortunes of Tap On Power during the race, everybody jumped to the conclusion that he was out for an airing.
Sunny Chinoy brought the Crauchan gelding six horses wide at the top of the bend and began to ride him out. With each stride, Tap On Power inched closer to the front running horses and finally pipped Backburn Rocket on the post to have the last laugh.
Before the start of the race Sunny Chinoy was called by the Stipes and severely warned. A Stipe told TheHindu that had Sunny Chinoy lost the race on Tap On Power he would have faced severe consequences.
The first race was centred around Flying First and Vitali and the rest were racing just to fill up the minor slots on the frame. Top weighted Flying First under H. G. Rathod pegged back Vitali midway up the straight, and the other rivals had no calibre to match strides with the winner.
Champion trainer Dallas Todywalla saddled his first winner through Badgering who had to wage a grim battle throughout the straight with Thundering Beauty before landing the spoils. The public choice Noble Challenge found the weight a stopper and finished fifth.
Sensational's zest for racing was seen when the gelding keenly sorted out the pretenders who were racing in front with a smooth spurt and drew away to register a thumping victory. Vandalism lost her chances at the start itself as she was slowly off and raced in the rear.
Trainer H. J. Antia's Premier League's chances of wearing the winner's crown, in the feature event, and that too in the hands of an apprentice jockey R. Shelar was a remote possibility because in his earlier run in the lower class carrying 58.5 kgs, he had ended last.
But Antia's assessment of his ward in the enhanced class with light weight proved right when a 5 to 1 chance, Premier League collared Wolf River and Jaannisar in the straight to come up trumps by seven lengths. The penalty for earlier win put the skids on Jaannisar.
Considering Legendary Lover's last run many felt that the present trip was out of his compass. But this son of Cristofori easily put paid to the pretensions of Double Impact, who was racing after a three months lay off, by sparing 4-1/2 lengths at the wire. With the benefit of this lung-opener Double Impact should prove his worth in future.
Dr. Anil Kumar who got the trainer's licence during the current Mumbai season saddled his first winner through Innara. M. Narredu rode a well judged race on the winner.
RAM D. ZODGE
