
HYDERABAD
THE absence of trainer Leo D'Silva from Malakpet had no real effect on his runners on Boxing day when a short card of six events was framed. This professional scored a hat-trick in absentia when Appu rode the winners in the first three races. Appu made it a quadruple with Blitz Craiz for a cent per cent record during the afternoon.
It started with the opener for 2 year olds where winners were eligible to enter. The much talked about and heavily supported Silent Force always travelled comfortably to be pushed along down the straight. This quick and fast actioned colt did what was asked, Appu easing the colt about 75 m from home. The Twist and Turn youngster has to be measured when he comes across stiffer opposition when the bigger races for 2-year-olds come around, till then it is to be seen how he improves. Bold Attempt who positioned last of six, gradually moved up to overtake all but the winner. The way he recovered the large area to fill the second place was worthy of watching this gelding's progress.
The next two races were won by Flying Monarch and Bluegrass Gal, both owned by D'Silva. The former turned the tables on Independence Day who had beaten him last time. Flying Monarch's consistency over long trips eventually paid off when this gelding outstayed his rivals to bundle them into one heap as he took this 2200m race in a facile manner. This son of Classic Tale will be hard to toss in these extended races.
Having edge over her opponents in the Prince Pradeep Cup the high rated Bluegrass Gal should have taken this race with a measure of comfort. Although winning this race from the start, Appu had to exert and bring out the maximum from this mare for her to lift the prize as Stewart and Cool Riddin, especially the latter, strutted in with a sound gallop to be fastest at the finish.
This was the first attempt that Blitz Craig made to race over 1600m with Cat. I opponents in the Prince Mouzam Jah Bahadur Memorial Cup. This brilliant colt who has been a marvellous purchase for his owners had to face a few good horses today like Fire Arch, Sporting, Splendid King and Raindeer Quest. Carrying minimum weight in this terms event, Appu had the ride on this son of Young Senor. In the race he was settled cleverly allowing the others to go ahead. Always having the trump card in hand, Blitz Craig made a superb impact on his more experienced rivals by dishing out special treatment with his powerful turn of foot that carried him clear to win by over three lengths from Splendid King who made a flashy appearance from the rear to be an isolated second ahead of Patton, a lightly raced 5 year old, who is regaining some lost ground and could be reaching for better places next time.
It was the right send off for the 6-year-old Red Victory when this gelding who reached the board thrice settled matters without any effort in a mile event under GB Khade. Bold Star made his usual late arrival but the winner was far ahead. This gelding can pull out another win if his timing at the finish is right. Pebble Purse made brave efforts under top weight but had to settle for the third spot. It was transfer from Cat. II to III for Queen of Education who immediately repaid her owners before retiring with a sustained gallop to lift the last race for trainer Sk. Kassam. Bold Reason meandered through from the rails to make a great effort to slip in second. Hungama another to catch on late could strike in a race for older horses.
With a spate of divisions on Saturday, the races swelled to eleven. Jockey A. Samad who could make a strong bid for the championship had a treble in this long card, picking both the 2 year old races. Riding Gold Chunk in the first for Sk. Kassam with the flying second that this gelding produced in his earlier outing was enough to guide him as on money favourite. This Gold Discovery youngster bred at the Manju Meadows Stud is sharp, spurting out from fourth place to take his rightful spot in the winner's enclosure. A filly who expressed her appreciation of her educational run was Abbatale who gave trainer Satheesh a sound warning that her swinging finish for second place puts her on target to strike when wanted.
In the other division of the maidens race the first four places remained intact from the gate to the winning post. Five Spark's workouts during the trials made him the most fancied. This Equus bred gelding set off smartly and ran a mature race for a first timer, clipping along in style for a comfortable win and an effortless ride for Samad. He is by No Louder/Petite Ebauche. Cool Edge who finished third should benefit from this run.
Not in a state to give weight all round, Nevada whose rating went up, after his close second last time enjoyed the relief on his back with Cat. II runners. But he could already visualise the toughness of these horses when Samad had to bring out all the reserves to keep this 5-year- old's nose in front of Run High who has been performing consistently. Crystal Reef is showing signs of feeling his way in this set with an impressive run under Yusuf Khan.
Where was Rustom last week? If you remove the winner Au Courant out of the picture then Rustom was a close sixth. This reference is being made as records will show that this gelding ran off the board last week. Rustom was 10 to 1 today but the victory was pretty smooth as Shinde struck a fine understanding with this 4- year-old to romp home. Super Image may be given another chance. The run of Sunraycer could be an eye opener as something special may come from this chestnut.
Earlier KV Srinivas had won with Akeesha in a race for the older horses. Again one of the horses that raced last week and placed nowhere. As a last resort this mare was fitted with blinkers and there was total transformation to her deeds. She was keen racing right up with the leader and plucked the prize away in her parting race as she retires. Neo Rita who has been dropped in weights found her rating manageable with a pushing second that augurs well for her owner whose size of stable has reduced to almost a few horses. Mr. Collector ran badly to fade away after leading.
On his last race Bottom Line travelled on the outer section of the track being badly drawn and was also interfered with, costing whatever chance there was. On that line this gelding had the clearest of paths today, running through the middle of the field to win with authority from the unlucky Illuminous who had the bad luck of finding the winner in top form. Rival came as usual with a flourish to get the third spot.
The enquiry into the run of Nishant, the fine imposed by the Stewards and the appeal by trainer D.Netto has taken a funny twist. The trainer was fined Rs. 10,000 for race No. 49. Then he raced again in race no. 74. where he finished fifth. In between Netto appealed against this fine. Today Ravinder Singh takes Nishant to the front and lands the only cup race of the day but with great individual effort, as Ravinder had to use his might to hold Stylish Way by a narrow margin. Artania would require a longer race to be effective. Apparently the Appeal Board went in favour of Netto and the fine was rescinded. Many punters felt that the fine should have remained. However one point comes to mind that Netto had taken over this horse from Dhariwal and the run in race no. 49 was under his training, and so may not have had enough knowledge of this horse's individual peculiarities.
The condition that non winners since July 1 this year can only run, made things easier for Meri Merzi and Bonny Scot, both top weights, who will now be back in Cat. II races. Both won their respective races with ease. Meri Merzi was more prominent as a winner since he lost position and fell back to come round the field and forge ahead, while Bonny Scot was a forward runner. Hercules can upset in a similar race. The same applies to General Nediym who could also bring in a surprise win for his owners.
The two divisions of the non winners race were picked up by the forward running Palo Alto and Revoque both well backed runners. It would be difficult for them to cross swords in open company. Huntley is knocking around and finds the weight going against him. This 3 year old was handled poorly and could do better with a more competent rider. Gold Label once again played bridesmaid being the third time he is doing so. As he slips up to stiffer opposition he might break this streak of seconds with the lighter weight that he would now be carrying. The outer track run by Moghalsarai which fetched her fourth spot was inviting but she should be tried over a slightly longer race where her exploits may be seen to advantage.
ARIEN
