
MANY UNION MINISTERS, the Chief Minister of Jammu and Kashmir, the security forces and other agencies of the Government dealing with terrorism are understandably upset at the release of three top militants in exchange for the passengers on board a hijacked Indian Airlines flight. It is futile to continue the debate on whether these militants should have been freed. Though Maulana Masood Azhar may have been a key catch, the authorities concede that no major charges were framed against him and a special court rejected the grounds of detention under the erstwhile anti- terrorism laws. This raises serious questions on what the Governments - both at the Centre and in the States - should do with similar cases. It is one thing for the armed forces or the police to be convinced that a person is a terrorist, militant or an accomplice, but quite another to prove it in a court of law. It is quite possible that some of these `organisers' and leaders of cross-border terrorist outfits who are caught in India cannot be charged for specific offences, except for violations of the Passport Act. That cannot attract a deterrent punishment, but this appears to be a genuine problem the authorities face.
In the aftermath of the plane hijacking and the release of three hardcore elements, it is quite likely that militancy and terrorism in Jammu and Kashmir and some of the border States may increase in the months to come. There is, therefore, an urgent need to refashion the Government's policy and approach to counter terrorism. The best course will be to step up the vigil along the borders to contain infiltration of foreign elements and also Kashmiri militants trained abroad. But experience has shown that this cannot be stopped altogether. That makes the function of the intelligence agencies more important and difficult. They have to look for new entrants, the links with existing outfits and unearth their plans in time to scuttle them and apprehend the conspirators. Before nabbing the militants or soon after they are caught, it becomes imperative to collect enough evidence against them to stand the test of law. Given the modern and sophisticated devices now available, it should be possible for the enforcement agencies to gather the required material to support their case. It may be very difficult to get witnesses to depose against known militants, especially in a troubled State like Kashmir. Similarly, the judges functioning in such a State will face extreme pressure from both sides.
Taking into consideration all these problems and the need to meet the requirements of the law, the Ministries, Central agencies and terrorist-affected States must evolve a new approach to combat terrorism in any form. Even while stamping out militancy, they must strive to address the basic issues that have nurtured these activities - be it in Kashmir, the Northeast, Bihar or Andhra Pradesh for example. Terrorists are not bound by any laws or human considerations, but Governments are. Though India may be seen to have succumbed to terrorism at Kandahar, it has succeeded in bringing cross-border terrorism to the centre stage in global fora. As terrorist groups have grown, died and regrouped over many years, any fight to stamp them out will also be long drawn. The Governments will have to keep the people on their side and not alienate them while fighting terrorism. Even under extreme pressure, the temptation to turn to extra-legal devices or to bring in draconian measures must be avoided and human rights norms and legal processes must be scrupulously observed. The security forces must redouble their efforts to track down the terrorists and their accomplices and bring them to book.
