
Sir, - The release of the hostages aboard the IA plane in exchange for the three hardcore militants is a pyrrhic victory for India. For every hardcore terrorist captured or gunned down, we lose more than 10 officers and men. A zealot of the calibre of Maulana Masood Azhar can motivate and train hundreds of militants, putting in peril the lives of thousands of our countrymen, not to speak of the safety of our vital strategic installations and ammunition dumps.
The NDA Government stands exposed for what it is, lily-livered. It could very well have released the Moulvi immediately after the hijackers made their first demand as the seized aircraft was flying over Lucknow. Because of the Government's procrastination, the hijackers have secured the release of two more militants.
The Government did not have a contingency plan. It failed to commission a team of negotiators who had had firsthand experience in meeting a crisis that stared them in the face. Well- experienced men in the security forces and the army who had successfully grappled with militants and hijacks were ignored. It did not put the well-trained commandos on alert. Finally it has bowed ignominiously to the hijackers' threats.
R. Rajaraman,
Chennai
* * *
Sir, - Needless to say, the security staff at the Tribhuvan International Airport goofed up their assignment. As one who went through the rigmarole of security checks at various airports, I believe that the security staff concerned are party to the crime, more than being guilty of lapses. But the greater tragedy was the way our bureaucracy reacted. Mr. Brijesh Mishra, Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister, needs to be given a Nobel Prize for the most innovative remark about the situation when he said `the hijackers obviously belong to a terrorist outfit'. That the hijackers demanded the release of their comrades from the custody of Indian authorities obviously disclosed their affiliations.
A specialist in his `An anti-terrorism handbook' says it is a grave mistake to imprison terrorists. They always remain catalysts of further terrorist activities. The author suggests employment of specially trained operators who can break the backbone of terrorist organisations, which job even whole armies cannot and should not be expected to do.
Maj (retd). P. M. Ravindran,
Kalpathy (Kerala)
