
MOST OF the students these days are pursuing university education without any specific and well-defined purpose, resulting in huge expenditure and curtailing the expansion facilities in the universities. Although our country requires manpower and expertise in diversified fields, the employment opportunities for university graduates have not increased proportionately, even with the ever increasing, uncontrollable population even after five decades of Indian Independence. Since secondary education is not made terminal, it resulted in exerting tremendous pressure on colleges and universities for aimless admissions affecting their scarce financial resources, material and manpower which would otherwise have been used for a meaningful and selective educational development. It is obvious that, this in turn has resulted in degrading the quality of education and in promoting indiscipline and frustration among the students.
Keeping in view the dissatisfaction among the students and their unemployment, the UGC has re-modelled and re-structured various courses of study at the first degree level. This aims at helping students to acquire usable knowledge and skills including practical training relevant to the need of the job market and national requirements. To start with, as many as 35 vocational subjects covering arts, humanities, social sciences, commerce, economics, management, sciences, engineering and technology were designed in collaboration and consultation with representatives of employment establishments for easy and effective implementation. To avoid drastic changes in the present set up of three year degree course in the Indian Universities and colleges, these vocational subjects are offered as one of the optional along with other two/three non-vocational subjects prescribed in the curriculum, on an experimental basis. Depending upon the success of the experimentation with these subjects, consideration will be given for their elevation to three year vocational courses in the year to come.
The different vocational subjects introduced in the first degree education include functional Hindi and Sanskrit, communicative English, archaeology & musicology in the discipline area of arts, humanities and social sciences. Principles and practices of insurance, actuarial science, office management and secretarial practices, tax procedures, practices, foreign trade practices and processes, tourism and travel management, advertising, sales promotion and sales management, and computer applications are included in the commerce, economics and management discipline area.
The sciences included industrial chemistry, food science and quality control, clinical nutrition dietetics, industrial microbiology, bio-technology, biological technique and specimen preparation, seed technology, sericulture, industrial fish and fishery, instrumentation, optical instrumentation, geo- exploration and drilling technology, mass communication video production, and still photography. The fast growing engineering and technology discipline area accommodated electronic equipment maintenance, environment and water management, rural technology, automobile maintenance, refrigeration and air conditioning maintenance, construction technology management, and manufacturing processes.
Sincere efforts are being made by those colleges and universities which have introduced these vocational subjects in their curricula five years back, to achieve success in their experimentation, in terms of generating level of employment.
Doubts are being raised about the potentialities of these subjects. Since the identification of subjects and the preparation of detailed syllabi have been done by expert panels consisting of expert subject specialists drawn from different universities, colleges and professional institutes and employer representatives, there is not much scope for doubting their potentialities. Provisions are, however, made for modifications in the syllabi, taking into account the local conditions, and marketable skills required on actual job situation leading to greater employability of both self and wage.
`On-the-job training' of students in a productive establishment for a minimum period of one month each at the end of the first and second year during the course of study forms an important and essential part of the curriculum.
Participation in actual work situation and command over certain managerial and entrepreneurial skills alone would give them the desired level of confidence and certain critical competencies to establish their employment venture.
The employable skills thus developed is planned to be relevant to the national economy and occupational life of the local community. The students are better prepared to find employment or start their own enterprise, thus helping the scheme of self- employment and entrepreneurship. Self employed graduates help in creating employment for others. In other words had they been wage employed they would have blocked the employment prospects for others for about three decades.
Promotion of entrepreneurial competencies is stressed in all the vocational subjects for all students; but its effective implementation is doubtful because of several reasons. The institutions are ill equipped to develop entrepreneurs towards productive establishment within the short duration of the degree course.
The students have to study 2-3 optional subjects and two compulsory subjects along with the vocational subjects. Two months `on-the-job training' during the three year course of study appears to be a mere completion of the formality rather than a progressive step for gaining substantial training, essential to gain wage employment or to be self-employed.
The desirability and need of the hour is preparing graduates with market-sensitive competencies combining requisite knowledge and skills, enabling them to take up careers.
Acquiring knowledge and skills required by job market or for entrepreneurial ventures needs a full course of study for three years.
The syllabi designed by the experts need further re-orientation, converting it into a course rather than an optional subject. More emphasis is to be laid on the practical and training in well established, reputed, organisations, institutes, or industrial units for a minimum of 3-4 months every year, instead of two months only during the three years of study.
Consideration may be given for increasing the duration of study of these courses from the present three years to four years, if upward mobility is also kept in mind. The colleges and universities, which opt to run these courses, should be provided with sufficient financial aid to equip them to run the courses effectively.
The new economic policy may help generating a few unskilled and semiskilled jobs, and obviously more professionals. The professionals choosing their careers as entrepreneurs can be self-employed and start their own small business, taking up contractual work with bigger firms. Slowly but surely they may become independent in their enterprise and can scale to new heights in the years to come.
DHRUBASH KARAN MATHUR
