
KANYAKUMARI, JAN. 2. A gift presented to the Chief Minister, Mr. M. Karunanidhi, by the TMC president, Mr. G. K. Moopanar, on the occasion of the unveiling of the statue of Tiruvalluvar at Kanyakumari on Saturday night became a subject of political speculation.
Mr. Karunanidhi, who was surprised by the title of the gift- wrapped English book, `You Can Win', said he could understand what was in the mind of his former political ally, Mr. Moopanar, and gave an assurance to realise it.
The Chief Minister said the standing ovation requested by Mr. Moopanar for the achievement of getting the statue installed at the confluence of three seas was a testimony to the goodwill nurtured by the TMC leader towards him. Still, some persons were unable to realise this bond between them.
Mr. Moopanar's heart, Mr. Karunanidhi said, had always remained attracted towards him for years, ``though the environment around the TMC leader now is not good''. He referred to the ``blacking out'' of his initiative in the construction of the `Valluvar Kottam' in Chennai for 13 years for political reasons and said his Government, on the contrary, would ensure that the foundation stone laid during the regime of the late MGR would also be installed at the Tiruvalluvar statue here.
Mr. Moopanar, for his part, profusely complimented Mr. Karunanidhi for the achievement of getting the statue installed and called for a standing ovation from the crowd in appreciation of it. The crowd responded to the request with applause.
Mr. Karunanidhi used the occasion to make an appeal to the Union Government to declare `Tirukkural' as a national scripture and the year 2000 as the `Year of Tamil'. He announced that the State Government would initiate steps from January 16 for starting reading rooms and libraries in the name of Tiruvalluvar in all panchayats and municipalities.
The Chief Minister said the `Kural Award', a sanction of Rs 1000 per month for children proficient in `Tirukkural', would be presented to all those in the age group of four to 20 years from the current month. The gesture, he said, was intended to popularise the learning of the universally accepted scripture.
