
Once the hijackers took the plane to Kandahar and landed among the ``friendlies'' of the Taliban heartland, India's options were severely reduced, says C. RAJA MOHAN.
The unpardonable incoherence in its immediate response to the hijacking of IC 814 and the inordinate delays in decision-making thereafter severely constricted India's options in ending the hostage crisis on its own terms.
At the mercy of the Taliban in Kandahar, India was ultimately reduced to bargaining with the hijackers on their demands and eventually trading three hardcore militants for the freedom of the hostages.
Three major blunders at the beginning forced India into the unenviable position of being helpless against a set of brutal hijackers, who had the advantage of being in a country that serves as a home base for international terrorism and in constant contact with their patrons in Pakistan.
The first failure was in taking preventive action against terrorism. The biggest weapon of any terrorist group is its ability to choose the time and place of an attack. Despite being a major victim of terrorism over the last two decades, India seemed unwilling to or incapable of maintaining a continuous vigil against terrorism.
For nearly a month before the hijacking of IC 814 took place, the Clinton Administration had been putting out public warnings against the possibility of a spectacular terrorist strike at the turn of the millennium.
But in a typical fashion India failed to get its system geared up against this threat. If India had taken even the most elementary precaution, the week-long misery of the hostages as well as the humiliation of bargaining with the terrorists could have been avoided.
The second failure was in the inability to respond rapidly to the hijacking of IC 814 and the terrible blunder of letting the aircraft fly out of Amritsar. As in the early phases of the Kargil conflict and the reaction to the super cyclone that hit Orissa, so in Amritsar the Indian bureaucracy could not get its act together in a crisis and as a consequence the country had to pay a heavy price.
Though the passenger aircraft stayed at Amritsar airport for nearly an hour, standard procedures for hijacking contingencies were ignored and a paralysed system allowed the aircraft to take off. That was the moment when India lost control of the hostage crisis and could never regain it.
There was brief moment of hope when the aircraft landed at a military airbase in the United Arab Emirates. Quick decisions then could perhaps have ensured that the crisis would be played out in a country that is part of the civilised world and friendly to India. If India had come up with reasonable ideas then, the hijackers' bluff could have been called. But India did not.
Once the hijackers took the plane to Kandahar and landed among the ``friendlies'' of the Taliban heartland, India's options were severely reduced. For India the terrain was hostile and the choices were few.
India apparently did consider a military option of storming the aircraft. That could have been a very costly one in terms of the lives lost. If ever there was a window for such an exercise, it was rather brief. The Taliban quickly ensured that India would not dare storm the aircraft.
Given the state of the isolation of Afghanistan there was very little that the international community could do in pressuring the Taliban. There was talk for a while by the Russians of convening a meeting of the Security Council, but India had its usual but often needless apprehensions about an ``internationalisation'' of the Kashmir dispute and was reluctant to get the Security Council activated.
With no diplomatic relations or even contacts with the Taliban, and having recently conducted a serious international campaign against its support for international terrorism, India was on a weak wicket dealing with the mullahs of Kandahar.
The initial positive statements of the Taliban and its assurances that it will prevent any harm to the hostages raised expectations in India that the Taliban leadership would, for some political gains from New Delhi, force the hijackers into an unconditional release of the hostages. But these hopes turned out to be self- delusion on India's part. All that the Taliban did by sounding positive on the safety of the passengers was to step up the pressure on India to bargain with the hostages.
As India played for time, the Taliban put up a deadline for the resolution of the crisis. There was no longer the political will in New Delhi to call the bluff of the Taliban. And all that was left was to deliver three hard-core terrorists and get the passengers back.
If the Government it does not initiate comprehensive reforms in the security sector, India will become even more vulnerable to terrorist threats in the future.
