
SYDNEY, JAN 3. The wind continued to blow in the direction of another Australian triumph as the Indians spent the day discovering some more shortcomings in their game.
Propelled by Justin Langer's workmanlike essay, Australia finished the second day of the final Test at 331 for four, a first innings lead of 181 runs as the Indian bowlers failed to make inroads into the opposition ranks despite promising in phases. Langer returned unconquered at 167 in the company of an in-form Ricky Ponting, the standing ovation being a fitting recognition for his performance.
The Australian batsmen demonstrated the right way to attain domination on a pitch which encouraged cautious strokeplay. With the left-handed Langer in a mood to graft, the Australian innings adopted the right course and pace to engage the huge audience on a wonderful, uninterrupted day for cricket at the SCG.
The setting was quite appropriate for the well- mannered Langer to produce an innings of character. It may not have been attractive but it was most effective as far as Australia was concerned. He was not at his best for most part of the knock but this was a very determined effort from the man who had crafted priceless centuries against Pakistan prior to the series against India.
Langer struck gold just when the team required. There was pressure on him after his last four innings had produced an aggregate of just 66 runs. He made it up amply today as he applied himself to the job in a remarkably disciplined manner. Going by Langer's style, it was clear he was enjoying himself out there. He likes to take a good look at the bowling and can wait for eternity to score off a bad ball. Just the right temperament and an ideal batsman to keep the focus on for the rest to emulate. His innings played a major role in shaping Australia's dominance today.
The presence of Langer meant that the Indian bowlers felt uncomfortable against the left-right combination. Even if two early successes came their way, the Indians could not press home the advantage for Australia had a productive pair in Langer and Mark Waugh, the latter looking convincing every moment of his bright innings.
Australia's concentration was clearly on building a strong first innings lead and Langer was entrusted the job of keeping one end plugged. His ability to defend well worked in his favour this day even though he was not averse to belt the loose deliveries. The Indians were quite inconsistent in their work on the field and it added to the pressure on the bowlers. The two fielding lapses by Venkatesh Prasad in letting through boundaries were an eyesore.
Langer did not promise a long essay as he failed to connect the ball frequently in the early part of his innings. He was beaten so many times and inner-edged repeatedly to raise India's hopes but nothing went to hand or stumps. On one occasion, he was bowled off a no-ball from Srinath when on 45. He was destined to get his third century of the summer in five Tests, which he eventually reached in the last session of the day.
Langer was content scoring his runs from nudges square of the wicket and steers through the slips but once he got the measure of the attack, he played some delightful shots in front. A couple of on-drives enhanced his confidence and in the company of the elegant Mark Waugh he helped Australia establish a firm grip on the match.
Australia's start, after the last two Indians wickets had fallen without much resistance this morning giving Glenn McGrath his 16th five-wicket haul in Tests, was as shaky as has been the trend in the series. Michael Slater was foxed by one which straightened while Greg Blewett dragged the ball on to his stumps. Mark Waugh walked in at this stage to quickly take charge with some positive play.
Mark Waugh played his shots and in the process inspired Langer and India's woes increased as the pair grew in confidence. Mark Waugh looked in command, having hit Kumble for a straight six, when he gloved the ball on to the stumps to mark the end of the 97-run stand.
The Mark Waugh-Langer partnership gradually took the game away from the Indians. The fielding had been below mark and the bowling too degenerated as Ajit Agarkar and Srinath pitched the length which invites you to play the cut and pull quite comfortably. Agarkar lost his focus in the afternoon when Langer promptly smacked him square of the wicket and Steve Waugh too did not hesitate to give the treatment to Srinath. Kumble was the only one from the rest to look effective briefly while Vijay Bharadwaj tried his innocuous off-spinners at this level and that too not until after tea.
The Indian bowlers did try but the Aussies were better equipped to force their way out. The century stand between Langer and Steve Waugh left the Indians frustrated. They appealed in vain the whole day but the umpires remained unconvinced.
Steve Waugh's half century was quite significant since it gave Langer an inspiring message. When his partner was building upon the foundation laid by him, Langer was not going to be complacent in his resolve to occupy the crease for the day. The 121-run stand ended when Steve Waugh was trapped leg-before with the new ball.
Langer's sixth Test century left the Indians crestfallen. Mediocre bowling in the last session only made the task difficult for Tendulkar to set a field as the new ball was wasted. The Indian skipper also had the mortification of being refused saw dust by umpire Darrell Hair in the afternoon to help his bowlers get a proper footing in their run-up. The Indians barely managed to drag themselves off the field with the prospect of another grinding day looming large on Tuesday.
