
NEW DELHI, JAN. 3. The Ministry of Civil Aviation proposes to revive the concept of a Central Aviation Security Force (CASF) to oversee security at all domestic airports, in the aftermath of the recent hijacking.
This will be discussed tomorrow at an internal meeting convened by the Minister of Civil Aviation, Mr Sharad Yadav. The proposal to post commandos on every flight will also be examined at the meeting. The is a prelude to a proposal to constitute a high- level inter-ministerial committee to oversee civil aviation security.
A decision has been taken to despatch a team of experts to Israel to study various civil aviation security aspects. The Israeli El Al Airline, for instance, has its own security. The CASF is proposed to be constituted on the lines of security agencies such as the National Security Guards (NSG), Special Protection Group (SPG) and the Central Industrial Security Force (CSIR).
The proposal to set up a unified civil aviation security has been gathering dust since 1993, when an Inter- Disciplinary Group studied the security aspects and given its recommendations.
Airport security is now in the joint care of the Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS), the Delhi Police and the Airports Authority of India (AAI). In what can be called a fight for the turf, all the three agencies have a cold war over the supremacy at the airport.
The Bureau had recently secured the sole right to issue passes for entry into airports, overruling the Delhi Police and the AAI. Earlier, both the AAI and the Delhi Police could also issue passes or at least recommend them. In fact the report for a unified Central Aviation Security Force has also been gathering dust because of clash of interests of these three agencies and related service scales/grades and promotion policy ,etc.
It is proposed that the Bureau of Civil Aviation, in its new avatar as Central Aviation Security Force, be entrusted with security within the airports, while the local police be given the jurisdiction of overseeing law and order outside the airport. The proposal to post sky marshals on aircraft is also an old one, though never taken seriously by the Government. Even now, there is a subtle resistance by airlines on commercial grounds.
