
SYDNEY, JAN. 3. The team management, Kapil Dev and Sachin Tendulkar, refused to comment on the vexed issue of Mohammad Azharuddin not being considered for selection anymore.
The selectors in India maintain that the decision to keep Azharuddin out was taken at the behest of the team management in Australia. When sought for his reaction, all Kapil repeatedly said was the subject was confidential and he was not in a position to speak publicly.
This is how the press conference went:
Tendulkar made an effort ``I actually; my decision not really; whatever I think; I feel the selectors take decisions they want.....'' Tendulkar did not complete any sentence, and like his batting style, was cautious and preparing the groundwork when Kapil stepped in to say ``can I put in a broader way.'' Thereafter, Tendulkar stood a mute spectator as the coach took over the stage.
Kapil remarked ``it's a very confidential thing. I personally feel as team management we like to keep it confidential. That's the way I like to put it. I can't talk to the press until the Board President allows us.''
When told that back home nothing regarding selection matters was confidential (some of the selectors were happy to leak matters to suit their designs), Kapil said ``the team and the management here feel it is confidential. We did talk to them (selectors). We are happy with whatever they have done. No complaints as such. I don't want to say anything more than this. They can talk, but we can't. We are bound by certain norms and would like to obey them.''
Kapil was probed more. He continued ``our suggestions, their suggestions are part of the system. We will stick to the selection committee's decision. Everybody is not happy, but we are with the selection committee and we will stick to that.''
The coach agreed that he too had heard a lot on the subject, but concluded ``we don't want to talk. It is confidential.''
The seeds of controversy which have been sown firmly, will only grow now and the Board has hardly played the right role by allowing matters reach such a stage. It is no secret that the team management is not receptive to have the former captain back in the team for whatever reasons.
The matter is now in the court of the Board President. The selectors have made it a public debate. The team management insists it is ``confidential.''
