
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM, JAN. 2. The findings of the Justice Bhaskaran Nambiar Commission on the Sivagiri police action is likely to have larger political implications.
The Commission report, which was tabled in the Assembly the other day, is a setback of sorts to the CPI(M)-led LDF. But the Commission's justification of the police action at the Sivagiri Madhom, cannot be construed as a shot in the arm for the Congress(I)-led UDF. At best, the report has justified an administrative action and criticised a few lapses of the then Antony Ministry, but it is yet to bring political comfort for the Congress(I).
The report demolishes the very premise of Left politics since 1996 centred as it was on this emotive issue. In fact, the Sivagiri police action came in handy for the Left coalition, particularly the CPI(M), to play up the emotions of the Ezhava community during the 1996 Assembly elections. The CPI(M) leaders had repeatedly termed the police action as an excess committed on a pilgrimage centre, considered to be the Vatican of the Ezhava community. It was one of the main factors which worked against the Congress(I)-led UDF and swept it out of power.
A striking feature at that time was the CPI(M)'s open support to the dominant Swami Saswathikananda faction, which was ousted out of power from the Sivagiri Madhom following the police action, which was itself a consequence of a High Court verdict directing the then Antony Government to take steps to hand over the trust administration to the rival faction led by Swami Prakashananda. Every action of the LDF after coming to power in 1996 was to ensure the return of the powerful Saswathikananda group, culminating in the Government take over of the Sivagiri trust.
Ever since Mr. Antony took over reins as Chief Minister in 1995, the UDF attempted to rewrite communal and caste equations. The new equation was assiduously built up as a twin strategy. The Antony Government was instrumental in passing a law protecting backward class reservation from the creamy layer norm, followed by the arrack ban, intended to break the clout of the liquor lobby which had links to a predominant section in the Ezhava community.
The Sivagiri police action led to a lot of resentment and dashed the Antony Government's hopes of riding back to power. The Sivagiri and NSS factors partially proved to be its undoing in several Assembly constituencies in south Kerala. Besides, a predominant section in the Congress(I), including the senior leader, Mr. K. Karunakaran, and the former KPCC(I) president, Mr. Vayalar Ravi, did not see eye to eye with the Antony Government's actions. At a function the other day, Mr. Karunakaran did not hide his unhappiness at the police action, despite the Commission's findings.
The report should be read in the context of contemporary political developments. It has come at a time when the equations of the CPI(M) and the dominant SNDP leadership (the Velapalli Natesan- Saswathikananda axis) have shifted. The SN College issue has worsened the relations between the SNDP and the CPI(M), with the latter fully backing its students' wing, the SFI, in its agitation against the college management. Nevertheless, the CPI(M) is confident that the traditional left tilt of the community would help keep its base in tact despite the momentary embarrassment caused by the Commission report.
The Congress (I) sees the Commission report as an opening to rework its electoral equations, aided by the SNDP-CPI(M) confrontation. It believes that it would be able to capitalise on the strong anti-Marxist trend that is emerging among the community members and the collision between the SNDP and CPI(M) leadership. It strategically raised the SN College issue in the Assembly, besides succeeding in forcing the Government to table the Commission report.
Given the fact that Mr. Karunakaran was the only Congress(I) leader to appear on the Sivagiri platform since the police action, the invitations extended to several Congress(I) leaders, including Mr. Aryadan Mohammed, and Mr. G. Karthikeyan, both MLAs, to participate in the Sivagiri pilgrimage functions are being viewed as a silver lining. The party also hopes to appeal to the community at large on the strength of its positions on issues like creamy layer norm for backward class job reservation.
The Congress(I), according to some of its leaders, would not find it easy to rework its strategy because of the advent of the BJP as the third player in Kerala's rather fluid backward class politics. The new found association between some of the SNDP leaders like Mr. Natesan and the BJP is therefore significant. The Chief Minister, Mr. E. K. Nayanar, while participating in the pilgrimage function, himself took note of this development by referring to ``the saffron designs''.
As the situation has vastly changed since the 1995 police action, the question before the two main political fronts is whether they could neutralise the designs of the BJP, which hopes to secure a toehold in Kerala, by playing(if necessary blatantly), the backward class card.
