
SINGAPORE, JAN. 3. The Malaysian Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. Abdullah Ahmad Badawi, on Monday emerged as the likely successor to the Prime Minister, Dr. Mahathir Mohamad, under a peculiar practice of Malaysian politics. Mr. Abdullah was nominated by the Supreme Council of the United Malays National Organisation (UMNO) for the party's post of Deputy President, while Dr. Mahathir was renominated for the position of President.
These two posts as also several others in the party hierarchy will be filled during the organisational elections scheduled for May this year. The UMNO general assembly will meet for three days from May 11 following the separate sessions by the party's youth outfit and women's wing a day earlier.
While Dr. Mahathir, the longest serving leader in South-East Asia, became the UMNO President for the first time in 1981, Mr. Abdullah is being nominated as his deputy in the party for the first time. Since his appointment as Deputy Prime Minister in January 1999, Mr. Abdullah, then a Vice-President in the UMNO set-up, began performing the functions of the party's Deputy President. When he was reappointed as Deputy Prime Minister, following Dr. Mahathir's electoral triumph for a fifth successive term as Prime Minister, Mr. Abdullah stayed on as a party Vice- President.
By political convention, the UMNO President and Deputy President hold the posts of Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister respectively whenever the party is able to form the Federal Government. The UMNO heads a 14-party multiracial coalition Government that includes representatives of ethnic Indians and Chinese besides the majority Malays.
It is in this context that the perceived ``lacuna'' of Mr. Abdullah's elective status as just a Vice-President (not the Deputy President of the UMNO) would not make him an automatic successor to Dr. Mahathir either as Prime Minister or as party President in the event of his decision to retire. Dr. Mahathir has already announced that his present term as Prime Minister will be his final one, fuelling speculation that he might even call it a day ahead of the full period.
The post of the UMNO Deputy President has been vacant since Mr. Anwar Ibrahim's expulsion from the party in September 1998 following his dismissal as Deputy Prime Minister. While investing its latest moves with considerable importance in these circumstances, the UMNO Secretary General said in Kuala Lumpur today that the Supreme Council's unanimous decisions regarding Dr. Mahathir and Mr. Abdullah were not directives to the party delegates to refrain from fielding candidates against these two in the organisational elections scheduled for May. Although the Supreme Council would wish that these two remained unopposed, this was only an opinion, it was stated. Dr. Mahathir too echoed these views at a press conference in Kuala Lumpur today.
The UMNO divisions would now begin the process of selecting delegates to the party's general conference. Given today's decisions by the Supreme Council, an issue in focus will be whether the leaders in the divisions would apply the litmus test of loyalty to the Mahathir-Abdullah team in selecting delegates. The UMNO Supreme Council has, of course, made no secret of its wish for a smooth general assembly session in May, given the challenge that the party faces on account of the rise of political Islam in Malaysia at this time.
