
CALCUTTA, JAN. 3. Mohun Bagan shattered the hopes of Kingfisher East Bengal with a 1-0 win in a first phase encounter of the National Football League here at the Salt Lake Stadium on Monday. The clash of the two glamour outfits did not see much on the action front, but the keen battle on the psychological front was won by Bagan. James Singh, the crafty Bagan midfielder, capped his team's efforts with a brilliant volley in the 74th minute to decide the fate of the match.
Today's win gave Bagan three vital points to put its title pursuit back on the rails. The green-and-maroon brigade now has 10 points from five encounters, while East Bengal remained at seven also from five.
Both the teams began on a cautious note, but Bagan wrested the initiative early. Guided mainly by an alert midfield, Bagan succeeded in making effective forays and found the able schemer in Basudev Mondal, who donned the role of the centre-half effectively. Mondal, playing to his wont, satiated the forwardline with proper provisions that kept the opponent tugged to the defence mostly in the first quarter of play. Bagan forwards Nigerian Stephan Abarowei and Dipendu Biswas altered the mantle of the striker well. While the tall Nigerian excelled in receiving the crosses and releasing Biswas inside the box, Biswas too tried his best to create the opening for a crack at the goal.
But the goal remained elusive for Bagan, which found East Bengal's Ghanaian stopper-back, Jackson Agygpong, a virtual wall in front of the goalmouth. East Bengal, playing an uncharacteristic game, looked subdued and failed to bring up the desired results. Despite having quick strikers such as Bijen Singh and the more experienced Raman Vijayan, East Bengal forays lacked thrust.
Bagan's defence, owing to the absence of its suspended regulars, Devjit Ghosh, and a half-fit stopper-back Samuel Omollo, was expected to crack, but that did not happen owing to opponent's feeble attack.
Late in the first session when East Bengal took the initiative, the opponent defence, backed by a determined custodian Sandip Nundy, held on quite well.
But what led Bagan walk away with the match was its midfield planning. With right-back Suley Musah injured, East Bengal, had none to overlap on the wing.
While Bagan had James Singh and Mondal policing the half-line well with snap interceptions and quick releases that offset the opponent, which tried mostly to attack through the centre. East Bengal halfline, with Ghanaian Emanuel Opoku and Ranjan Dey neutralised, looked a pale shadow and failed to recover even after a late substitution of rusty Carlton Chapman by Tushar Rakshit. The introduction of Rakshit, however, looked a trifle too late as his entry was followed by the Bagan goal.
James Singh, who after creating two openings earlier, deservedly got the goal. The first one in the 31st minute went past the far upright as he darted in from right to place the ball past a diving custodian, Prasanta Dora.
However, he was more accurate in the 47th minute with a pile- driver from 25 yards, but this time Dora managed to put a hand to it.
In the 74th minute Singh was released just inside the box by a short chip by Abarowei, who caught the opponent defence on the wrong foot with this brilliant ploy. Singh, nippy as always, did not make any mistake this time volleying home past a hapless Dora.
Mohun Bagan striker Stephen Abarowei (right) attempting a left- footer at the goal against East Bengal in the NFL in Calcutta on Monday.
