
MANAMA (BAHRAIN), JAN. 2. The Israeli Prime Minister, Mr. Ehud Barak will today lead his delegation for talks with Syria scheduled to start tomorrow at a venue in Sheperdstown, in the State of West Virginia, U.S. According to a report in the Israeli press, Mr. Barak is carrying a document which contains an initial negotiating position and provides a powerful argument against his political opponents.
The talks are expected to commence with separate meetings between Mr. Barak and the U.S. President, Mr. Bill Clinton on the one hand and between the U.S. Secretary of State, Ms. Madeleine Albright and the Syrian Foreign Minister, Mr. Farooq al Sharaa on the other. It is expected that the schedule and agenda for the discussions will be decided at these meetings. A media blackout is to be imposed and some extraordinary precautions have been taken, including a ban on mobile phones. The talks are to last for ten days but Mr. Barak is expected to return after a week. It is not clear whether the Israeli Foreign Minister, Mr. David Levy, who is accompanying Mr. Barak to the U.S., will then carry on the talks with his Syrian counterpart.
According to the Israeli press, four negotiating committees are to thrash out different aspects of the dispute between the two sides. Separate committees will deal with the question of borders, security, normalisation and water. Israel is keen that priority should be given to the negotiations on security and normalisation leaving the border and water questions for later. Syria is, of course, more interested in settling the border and water questions first since it wants the return of territories which Israel has occupied since 1967. If the Syrians do agree to a speedier settlement of the security and normalisation issues, it would mean that they have received a priori assurances on the return of their territory, mainly the Golan Heights.
As could perhaps be expected given their focus on security, the Israeli delegation has a large number of serving and retired soldiers. Besides Mr. Barak, who was himself Chief of Staff, the delegation includes the Tourism Minister, Mr. Amnon- Lipkin Shahak, who succeeded Mr. Barak to the top army job. The present Chief of Staff is Lt. Gen. Shaul Mofaz. The Israeli delegation also includes the Attorney-General, Mr. Elyakim Rubinstein who had participated in the Camp David talks as a young lawyer. It is unlikely that the Syrians will make the same mistake as the Palestinians did when they undertook the Oslo negotiations with inadequate legal representation. The Palestinian failure to judge the weight of the small print in those accords has contributed not negligibly to the problems they have encountered in the implementation stage.
According to a report in the Israeli daily Haaretz, Mr. Barak will be carrying a copy of a letter that shows that his predecessor, Mr. Benjamin Netanyahu was ready to withdraw from the Golan Heights. The letter was purportedly written to the U.S. President, Mr. Bill Clinton by a U.S. businessman, Mr. Ron Lauder who was carrying back-channel contacts with Syria on behalf of Mr. Netanyahu. In the letter, Mr. Lauder is said to have told Mr. Clinton that Mr. Netanyahu had agreed to withdraw from ``the Syrian territory'' captured in 1967``. Such a formulation falls short of the Syrian demand that Israel withdraw to the June 1967 border because a portion of the territory thus claimed was, according to Israel, not under Syrian sovereignty at the relevant point of time.
Mr. Barak should not have a problem in running with Mr. Netanyahu's formulation since he has given sufficient indicators that a withdrawal from the Golan is a distinct possibility. However, the letter comes in handy to beat back the Israeli Opposition which has only launched its campaign against the return of the Golan Heights. The Israeli Opposition can hardly argue against the return of the Golan when their erstwhile leader had promised as much while he was Prime Minister. When Haaretz approached Mr. Netanyahu for his comments, however, the former Prime Minister denied that he had decided to return the Golan.
AFP reports from Jerusalem:
Mr. Barak said today on Israeli public radio that peace with Syria had a ''very painful`` price. ''Peace with Syria has a very painful and very hard price, but it is necessary,`` he said a few hours before he was due to leave for the U.S.
Mr. Barak said he was convinced that peace with Syria would be approved by a ''large majority`` of Israelis in a promised referendum on any deal.
