
Patriotic fervour has overshadowed the hidden agenda of the Chechen war, says VLADIMIR RADYUHIN.
THE SURPRISE resignation of the Russian President, Mr. Boris Yeltsin, on the last day of the 20th Century sent an ominous signal to rebels fighting Russian troops in breakaway Chechnya. Their days are numbered, as Russia's new Acting President and the Kremlin's choice for Mr. Yeltsin's successor on the Russian throne, Mr. Vladimir Putin, needs a quick and convincing victory in Chechnya to win snap presidential elections, likely on March 26.
The so far successful military campaign in Chechnya has played a key role in making Mr. Putin, an obscure security official at the time of his appointment as Prime Minister five months ago, Russia's most popular politician and presidential frontrunner today. Mr. Putin's resolute handling of the Chechen operation made it the first popular war Russia has waged since World War Two. After years of suffering humiliation at witnessing Russia lose its superpower status, Russians rallied behind a leader who seemed capable of reasserting what Mr. Putin described as ``national pride'' by wiping out Chechen separatists.
Patriotic fervour has overshadowed the hidden agenda of the Chechen war: to install in the Kremlin a man who would protect political and financial interests of the ``family,'' a group of Kremlin insiders and business tycoons with close links to the Yeltsin family. They saw the war as their last chance to stay in power after Mr. Yeltsin stepped down upon completing his final term.
War-fed nationalist fervour brought its first dividends to the Kremlin last month, when parties supportive of Mr. Putin made big gains in parliamentary elections, while the alliance led by his main rival in the presidential race, Mr. Yevgeny Primakov, suffered a bad setback. All that Mr. Putin needs to do to climb onto the Kremlin throne is to declare the Chechen war won in time for the early presidential elections that under the Constitution must take place within three months after the President's resignation. Generals have already said they will wind up the military campaign by March at the latest.
Given its overwhelming superiority in strength and firepower the Russian army may well meet the deadline. Russia has fielded 100,000 troops against an estimated 6,000 to 10,000 Chechen militants. This is three times the strength of the Russian force that fought in Chechnya during the 1994- 1996 war, and Russian generals have also learned their lessons from the disastrous defeat in that war. They are careful to avoid head-on frontal assaults that were beaten back with terrible losses during the first war and rely heavily on air and artillery bombardment to flush out rebels from their strongholds. Since October 1, when they entered Chechnya, federal forces have occupied the larger lowland part of the breakaway republic without meeting much resistance, as Chechen militants withdrew into the capital Grozny and the mountains where they can better defend their positions. But fighting grew much fiercer when Russian forces mounted an assault on Grozny a week ago, which is the last rebel stronghold in the plains, and pushed for the mountains. Progress has been slow in both directions, with Chechens skillfully using the advantages offered by concrete buildings in Grozny and tree-grown rugged mountains in the south to put up stiff resistance.
General Ruslan Aushev, President of the neighbouring Russian Republic of Ingushetiya, predicted that the battle for Grozny would last a long time because the Chechens ``are excellently armed and will resist fiercely''. Now that presidential elections have been moved forward by two months, the Russian army will be asked to step up the drive against the rebels. This can only be done at the cost of higher losses, because despite a visible improvement in combat tactics, the Russian army still lacks mobile units trained in urban and mountain warfare. As they pushed through lowland Chechnya Russians routinely resorted to ``firewall'' tactics, which however is far less effective in Grozny and in the mountains.
Reports say Russian forces have started using deadly fuel air bombs to weaken rebel resistance. In the mountains they drop powerful bombs of 250 and 500 kg, which release a large cloud of inflammable aerosol that upon ignition kills people in shelters. In Grozny, where a wrongly dropped aerosol air bomb could wipe out friendly forces, Russians reportedly use multi-barrel launchers that fire unguided missiles with aerosol warheads. Inevitably, fuel air bombs will kill not only militants but thousands of civilians who are still trapped in Grozny or have fled to the mountains. A high human cost of the war, though, should not really affect Mr. Putin's popularity. Russians have largely remained indifferent to the plight of half a million Chechens, half of whom has taken refuge in neighbouring regions. As for Russian casualties, the military have well mastered the art of playing them down. They would not report a daily count of losses and refuse to publish the names of killed and wounded soldiers. The Union of Soldiers' Mothers estimates that the official casualty figure of nearly 400 killed during the first three months of the campaign should be multiplied at least by three. There is no way to find out the truth, as Russian authorities have clapped tight controls on the media coverage of the war.
What can reduce Mr. Putin's chances of winning presidency is a drawnout guerilla war and the prohibitive cost of rebuilding Chechnya after the war. Some military experts predict that even after Grozny has been captured and main rebel strongholds in the mountains overrun, Chechen militants will be able to wage a guerilla war.``There was a similar situation in January 1996 when the militants were driven out of towns, but embarked on a hit-and-run war, which the army was unable to stop,'' said Mr. Alexander Golts, military commentator for Itogi magazine.
Post-war rebuilding of Chechnya is another problem that Russia failed to solve after the first war and can ill afford to tackle today. According to government experts, reconstruction work in Chechnya (not counting Grozny, which has been razed to the ground) will require 20 billion roubles (about $700 million) in 2000 alone, whereas the federal budget has earmarked only 585 million (about $20 million) for the purpose.
Mr. Putin's opponents in the coming presidential elections will certainly try to turn the issue of the Chechen war against the Kremlin's candidate. The liberal Yabloko party, which until recently was the only Russian party to have denounced the Chechen campaign as a ``war of revenge'', last week was joined by Mr. Primakov's Fatherland-All Russia alliance, whose spokesman said that what began as an ``anti-terrorist operation'' had escalated into a full-scale war, which the bloc could not support.
However, in the time left before snap presidential elections Mr. Putin can still ride the wave of popular support as Russian forces gain new ground in Chechnya. By the time the fallout of the Chechen war grows big enough to unravel Russia's victory, he will have been declared victor in the Chechen campaign and elected Russia's new President. And this has been the main motive behind Mr. Yeltsin's decision to resign early.
