
THE NEW year and the new century have after all started well, though many of us have some reservations. The absolutely positive thing is that the hostages in the hijacked plane and its crew are safely back home, but we should also remember solemnly that one did not come back - a young man on his honeymoon - and naturally our hearts go out to his widow and the family. It is too early to analyse the events. In fact, with opinions and counter-opinions being brandied about almost from the hour in which we learnt about the hijacking, it has certainly been a free-for-all. Should we have stopped the plane in Amritsar? Could we have? Again could we have purchased time when the plane was taken to Dubai? Hypothetical questions at this point.
One of the things that is obvious is that the Government was so petrified that there were two days of inaction, days which gave the jittery hijackers enough confidence to kill a harmless passenger. The news we received - thanks to Star, BBC and CNN TV stations - basically did nothing to reassure us, while our own news and news-type sources provided conflicting information.
Of course, the Government, once it was galvanised into action, reached out to other and friendly governments, but at no time during the eight days one got the feeling that the Government had a plan of action. One of the worst moments - to me, at any rate - was when the Communications Minister announced that every evening he would be meeting the press after the Cabinet meeting, thus giving the disorienting impression that the impasse will go on and on. Of course, I don't know who brought the hijackers' demands down to the release of three militants, but it was a bitter pill to swallow for a Government that had been talking tough.
The Party's leading lights, convening in Chennai, were violently outspoken about Pakistan and the Taliban while negotiations were still going on. That the hijackers would make impossible demands was only to be expected, but they scaled it down to what they really wanted, and got away with it.
So where does all this lead our Government? One is, we have allowed three of the worst militants back in circulation, and this is going to be an important factor in militant activity in Kashmir. Secondly, rightly or wrongly, many governments with strong views on terrorism and especially on hijacking, are going to wonder about the Indian Government's real ability to handle this sort of situation.
As I said, there will be time for analysis. In the meantime, let us remember that the Army Chiefs, police officials, and obviously some members of the Cabinet are not happy with the way the government resolved the situation.
Let us also remember that it was a horribly traumatic exprience for the passengers and the crew, and many of them might need psychological help - especially the children, and all of them need immediate attention.
At that it was an experience that cleaved the psyche of the Indian people, and one hopes that the Government and the BJP will resist the temptation to engage in self-congratulation, and provide some assurance to the people that this sort of nightmare will not recur. Let them not take recourse in the satirical words of the poet, Southey: ``But what good came of it at last?''/ Quoth Little Peterkin / ``Why that I cannot tell,'' said he/But't was a famous victory.''
Well, let us get back to our backyard. Several readers have complained about the Corporation changing the door-numbers of buildings in the city. Obviously there was no prior notice about the changing of numbers, though I don't see how that could have helped.
The subject has been pretty exhaustively discussed in this paper last Friday (or Thursday) and I have nothing to add to it, except that I am going to be mighty peeved when my letters are delivered to someone else. A reader writes to say that two years ago a building was built for Aavin AVM unit/at Purushothaman nagar, NGO Colony, and to this day it has not been put to use. On inquiry, the reader says, that Aavin is waiting for a Minister to find the time to open it. This is the way, he says, tax money is wasted, and I tend to agree with him, for this is a ridiculous situation.
Not having seen any announcement about the annual Book Fair, one of the highlights of the holiday season, I began wondering if it had been given up this year when I received a notice from the Book-sellers and Publishers Association of South India that the Fair will indeed be held from January 7 to 16 at the Quaid-e- Millat College on Mount Road. This 23rd annual fair will be inaugurated by the State Minister of Education, and will be presided over by a leading businessman.
Awards will be given by the Association at the inaugural function to best writers in English and in Tamil, and to persons who have made outstanding contributions to the book industry. The organisers say that the Book Fair this year promises to be bigger and better than ever before. A large number of publishers from all over India, including representatives of foreign publishers, are participating in the Fair ``in what promises to be the fitting welcome to the new millennium.''
A READER raises a question which I have also occasionally wondered about. ``No making charges, no wastage, no stone charges'' once in two months, this phrase is offered by many jeweller shops as a special scheme. How can one buy gold from a dealer at the prevailing prices, spend money on making ornaments, spend money on showroom overheads, and then offer the finished products at the price of the raw material bought. I feel they are making huge losses every year, or they are cheating the public by giving substandard gold'' I am sure all of us will be interested if somebody can explain this business practice.
LET US share some appropriate thoughts for the New Year:
Here's a health to the future,
A sigh for the past;
We can love and remember,
And hope to the last;
And for all the base lies
That the almanacs hold,
While there is love in the heart, We can never grow old.
And let us say fervently to our readers; Happy are we met, Happy have we been / Happy may we part, and Happy we meet again.
S. KRISHNAN
