
NEW DELHI, JAN 2. The Bharatiya Janata Party has all but tossed out its `swadeshi' economic plank as it makes haste to transform itself to suit its new role as a ``natural party of governance.''
As the main opposition party, if it had stalled reforms in the insurance sector and prevented the Narasimha Rao Government from legislating to allow foreign investment, now the BJP is asking for ``speeding up of reforms in insurance, banking and other financial areas'' to help reduce the cost of capital for Indian industry and business.
The Chennai Declaration of the BJP, adopted on December 29, is virtually a hymn to `Manmohanomics' - restrict government role, remove all unnecessary controls on industry, use the disinvestment route for a speedy reduction in national debt, rationalise subsidies, and go for financial sector reforms. However, it does not forget to include the other aspect of `Manmohanomics', invest more in the social sector.
When the BJP was in the opposition, senior party leaders were critical of the Rao Government's plans for disinvestment. They pointed out that this would be suicidal for it was like a family liquidating its capital and assets to meet its monthly bill on rent and food. But now, the party has asked for speedy disinvestment to be carried out with care and transparency to quickly reduce national debt and free resources for investment in the social sector, the same prescription Dr. Man Mohan Singh had recommended for the sick economy.
The only concession to `swadeshi' economics in the Chennai Declaration was a reference to the need for implementing schemes for ``cattle wealth protection'', another way of saying that cow slaughter should be banned and more cowsheds should be built.
Apart from this, the Declaration has made its intentions clear when it said, ``restrict government role as only a policy-maker and facilitator of development in all areas except the strategic sectors such as defence and nuclear.'' It further stated that ``all necessary controls and procedural hurdles in the path of Indian industry, especially small industry must go.''
While some of this may have been part of its `swadeshi plank', not a word was said on the need to restrict foreign investment in the high-tech or infrastructure areas.
There has hardly been a single party document relating to economic policy which has not denounced globalisation and the forcing of an economic agenda on Indian by the WTO deadlines. In Chennai, all that the party had to say on this was that it welcomed the ``positive response'' from the opposition in respect of the recently passed economic Bills and it looked forward to the opposition extending this cooperation further.
