
NEW DELHI, JAN. 3. The Special court for CBI cases today permitted the investigating agency to retain the final set of Swiss Bank documents relating to the Rs. 64-crore Bofors payoffs case for conducting further investigation.
The Swiss papers believed to be that of the sixth bank account of the alleged recipients of the kickbacks in the Rs. 1,437 crore Bofors gun deal were brought to India by a team of CBI officials last month. The papers were received as a sequel to the Letters Rogatory issued by the court in February 1990. The first set of documents were received in December 1990 and the second set in January 1997.
The CBI today presented the papers to the special judge, Mr. Ajit Bharihoke with a request that the agency might be allowed to keep them for further investigation. The Judge after perusing them in his chambers acceded to the request.
Meanwhile the Dubai-based businessman and former Bofors agent, 76-year-old Mr. Win Chadha, against whom a non-bailable warrant (NBW) was issued on December 14, 1999 for his production in the court on February 3, filed an application seeking a direction to recall the NBW.
Mr. Gopal Subramaniam, senior counsel for Mr. Win Chadha brought to the notice of the court that the summons had not been properly served on Mr. Chadha. He said Mr. Chadha would appear in the court provided all summons and orders of the court were served on him through the local authorities in the UAE.
He said as per the laws of the UAE, the summons had to be served through the Public Prosecutor's office in Dubai. However in this case, the summons issued by the court were intimated to him over telephone from the Consulate's office. This would not tantamount to proper serving of the summons. Moreover, as Mr. Chadha's passport had been impounded, he had no valid travel documents to come to India.
The Judge reminded the counsel that the very fact of filing the petition to recall the NBW would show that Mr. Chadha had subjected himself (though indirectly) to the jurisdiction of this court. The counsel replied that the purpose of filing the application was to remove the stigma that Mr. Chadha was evading summons.
Mr. N. Natarajan, special public prosecutor for CBI said being an Indian national, Mr. Chadha was duty bound to appear himself in the court once he was aware of the summons issued against him irrespective of the fact whether the summons were properly served or not. He said subject to the directions of the court ``we will provide whatever facilities possible, (viz. issue of valid passport and other travel documents) to enable him to visit India and appear in the court''.
The Judge indicated to Mr. Chadha's counsel that he would recall the NBW provided an undertaking was given that Mr. Chadha would appear in the court on the next date of hearing (February 3) once proper travel documents were directed to be made available to him.
The counsel wanted time to find out the correct position regarding the endorsement that would be made in the visa once the Indian government issued the passport to Mr. Chadha. He said he could not commit himself regarding Mr. Chadha's appearance without knowing the procedures involved.
The Judge while adjourning the proceedings to January 6 asked Mr. Natarajan to find out whether fresh travel documents could be provided to Mr. Chadha and the issues involved in it and inform the court on that day.
Besides, Mr. Chadha, the Italian businessman and close friend of the Gandhi family, Mr. Ottavio Quattrocchi, Mr. S. K. Bhatnagar, former Defence Secretary, Mr. Martin Ardbo, former President of the Bofors company and M/s A. B. Bofors of Sweden (now renamed as Celsius) have been cited as accused in the Bofors case. The name of Rajiv Gandhi figures in column 2 of the chargesheet meant for persons not sent up for trial.
