
THE future of books is safe despite challenge from other media forms like TV and the net, if bookshop owners and publishers are to be believed. Children's literature has recorded a 20 per cent growth rate in the last three years.
Unfortunately it has not been marked by any improvement in quality with typical titles like the Panchtantra and the Mahabharata being rehashed regularly. So, despite the sales talk, there is still a dearth of well-written books from Indian authors.
But there is some consolation. Our children do read and are more than willing to make do with R.L. Stine, J.K. Rowlings, the current hot favourite in Europe too, Ronald Dahl and good old Enid Blyton.
However these writers ffacce stiff competition from the latest line-up of books based on films. The multi-starrer "Star Wars", has a book and simultaneously launched its characters in toy forms to be sold with the books. There was "Prince of Egypt" with a picture book series and activity materials neatly packaged with the main story book.
According to Suparah Vaidik of New Delhi's "Bookmark":"The entertainment media is bringing out a lot of books. These are big ones like coffee table books meant for the upmarket child. Priced at Rs. 400 or Rs. 300, they make great gifts and that sends their popularity spiralling upwards."
But, according to him, the staple thing was still mainstream writing though preferred reading for today's children is horror stories or science fiction. Romantic fairy tales are now clearly the preserve of a much younger age group who soon graduate to books that send shivers down their spine. Nancy Drew and Hardy Boys pale in comparison to some of the newer stories.
Interestingly one of the newer trends to be noticed this year, and which will spill over into the millennium in a big way booksellers predict, is the alignment between the entertainment, book and the toy industries. Said Vaidik, "This is an area that has grown tremendously in the last year and is already a front runner in Europe."
Egmont, with its Disney and Barbie series, has already established the trend of children's books being based on a character that can be picked off the shelf. Though this has given a much needed boost to sales of children's books, quality is questionable.
Novelist Jan Mark has pointed out that too many of the 9,000 odd titles published annually in the U.K. for children, are of "deliberately low quality." He said that there was a perception that children who can't read very well need books that aren't written very well because otherwise they will feel humiliated. Added Mark, "Anything that is half way decent is elitist. The elitism lies in delivering the best books to a small minority and poorer quality to everyone else."
While Mark may have a point, publishers are not too worried about quality and content. They are more than happy to rely on the usual selection of European titles which keep children more than happy. Said Jacob Johnson at Crosswords, "Most children prefer to pick up Stine, Rowlings and Applegate. Among Indian writers Ruskin Bond sells. Indian authors are just not willing to experiment with writing for children." However most felt that the one name that spelt creativity in children's writing was "Tara". But that, they argued, was like a drop in the ocean.
The Panchtantra and Mahabharta comics/ books still sell - the chief buyers being NRIs who want to teach their children about tcultural heritage. Said Vaidik, "A lot of this is reinforced by television serials and many parents feel that if buying a book of the serial will keep the child away from the TV for a while then it is worth it."
Teachers, on the other hand, feel there is a 50-50 divide among the youth as far as their reading habits are concerned. According to them, children today have multiple choices and are aware of that. Their main interest, after a certain point, is concentrating on books based on information that they need.
Many feel that children read as much as they need. "I call this multi-tasking," added Vaidik, explaining that today's 12-to 18- year-olds will be able to work on computer search for information, talk on the phone and flip through a book at the same time." It's almost like a division of time. And the child is already aware of what he has to do."
However school libraries and public libraries offer a rather dismal picture. In 1999, most of them reported lesser attendance for any library period with children preferring to sit out than walk in and pick up a book and browse through it. The one period that reports the largest whoop of joy is computer class with even children as young as five preferring that to reading a book.
Not making their task any easier is the regular freeze on funds for school libraries - one of the first items knocked off on a tight budgeting exercise. Most school libraries still depend on the generosity of old students with who donate books regularly to their alma mater.
Despite this, all bookshops reported brisk business,with Crosswords, Bookmark and few others reporting that children's books as an extremely large selling segment. "It has been topping our lists for the last three years," said Johnson of Crosswords, "And I definitely feel that there is going to be no let up in this trend in the millennium."
SUCHITRA BEHAL
