
LONDON, JAN. 3. One of the Kashmiri militants released as part of the deal to free the hostages of the hijacked Indian Airlines plane, Ahmad Omar Sayyed Sheikh, is free to return to Britain as a British citizen, but his possible arrival here has sparked an outrage among the British victims who suffered at his hands.
The militant was arrested in India in November 1994 after he kidnapped three British tourists on holiday in India. The tourists were later freed by Indian forces, and now their families have reacted angrily to the news of the kidnapper's release. Mrs. Pamela Parridge, the mother of Mr. Rhys Parridge, one of the three to kidnapped tourists, said it was ``an outrage'' that he had been freed, and said her son was ``as disgusted as I am.'' Speaking to the Times newspaper, Mrs. Parridge said `` He (Omar Sheikh) has got away with all he wanted and now how many other innocent families are going to suffer,'' she asked.
Omar Sheikh has an unusual background for an Islamic militant: he studied at an exclusive private school (Forest School in Epping Forest) and went on to study mathematics at the London School of Economics.
The widow of another Britain, who was kidnapped and killed by the Harkat-ul-Ansar, also expressed shock at the release of the organisation's ideologue, Maulana Masood Azhar. Mrs. Julie Mangan, whose husband Keith was kidnapped and killed in Kashmir by militants in 1995, said she had gone to meet Masood Azhar in prison to plead for information about the whereabouts of the bodies of her husband and his companions. The Times reported that he had treated her with derision and disclaimed any knowledge of the kidnappers. ``It is scandalous what they have done,'' she said. ``I was shocked to see his face on television again and to hear his name.'' She described Masood Azhar as ``a cold and callous man'' and said it had been a ``horrendous decision'' to release him. ``When Keith was killed, the Indian authorities claimed they never gave in to the terrorists yet this is exactly what they have done,'' she said.
Since Omar Sheikh committed crimes against other British citizens, it is possible that his British victims might take legal action against him. It is not clear whether India will ask for his extradition if he returns to this country. But an extradition request could pose problems, since Omar Sheikh had never faced trial in India, and he had been released unconditonally by the Indian Government. However, his British victims might be able to take legal action against him here.
British official said that Omar Sheikh ``has not been convicted of any offence, and at this stage we have no indication that the Indians would seek his deportation if he does come back to this country.'' The official said ``as a full British citizen he had every right to return to this country,'' and added that the Government had spoken to his father, who lives in East London and informed him that they would provide normal assistance to get him back to Britain.
