
FIVE EVENTS in the last few months point to the same conclusion, that maintenance of the caste system is a vested interest of the dominant classes and that conversion is often a search for freedom from it. The first event is the threat of 200 Dalit families at Jind in Haryana to become Christians. The second is a covering letter to the president of the NCCI accompanying a scurrilous pamphlet. The third is the threat of 300 high caste Gaonkars in a Goan village to revert to Hinduism if Dalits are admitted to the parish councils and the fourth, the attack on a group of students near Bangalore. The fifth is the uproar created by the Pope's call to conversion.
The Dalits in Jind, oppressed for ages, wanted freedom. They were aware that those who have been converted to Christianity over a century ago continue to be discriminated against in their new religion. But they saw their Christian counterparts having a better subjective self-image and greater will to fight injustice. So they were ready to take the risk. However, the dominant caste leaders of the village coerced them into abandoning the idea and stated that if they changed their mind and became Christians, they would be forced to leave the village. According to a news item, some VHP workers visited Jind to ``counsel'' them not to become Christians. But they failed to ``counsel'' the village leaders to accept the principle of equality.
It is in this context that one has to understand the covering letter to Dr. K. Rajaretinam, president, National Christian Council of India. It comes with a scurrilous pamphlet in which Christians are declared a danger to the nation. After stating that (Mother) Teresa and Staines should have been expelled and all missionary activity banned long ago, the writer adds that people oppose conversion because ``the total rejection by the converted villagers of one's family heritage, traditions, village festivals, dead disposal, family marriage etc. is horrible and intolerable in any country.'' That is the crux of the problem. The high castes need the Dalits to beat the drum at marriages and funerals, to dispose of the dead and to perform other ``impure'' functions. These functions also symbolise their subjugation and are essential to maintain an unequal system. So their conversion is a threat to those whose riches and power depend on their poverty.
That brings us to the Goan Gaonkars. The colonialists got the collaboration of the local dominant classes in their economic enterprise. The Portuguese christianised the Brahmins and Sardos (who claim to be Rajputs). The British coopted some Brahmins into their administration, the princes into the ``self-ruling'' States and others into the army. But they maintained the unjust social system. In Goa the Brahmins and Gaonkars who were controlling the temples continued to control the churches and their lands. But three decades ago parish councils were formed with possible representation for every group. The Gaonkars were not ready to share power. Because in some parishes an effort is being made to admit Dalit Christians to the parish councils, they are threatening to revert to Hinduism to maintain themselves in power. My message to them is ``Good bye. Please become Hindus if to you religion is a vested interest and a mode of maintaining yourselves in power at the cost of the poor.''
The same message comes from the beating up of 26 boys and girls, students of St. Joseph's Evening College, Bangalore, on the night of November 5. This mixed group of Hindus, Muslims and Christians had gone to a village near Anekal for a social work camp. As they were sitting for dinner about 40 alleged VHP activists entered the house in which they were lodged and beat them up mercilessly. Some of them had to be hospitalised. The reason given is that they were trying to convert the Dalits of the village to Christianity. The message is clear. Dalits cannot be allowed any exposure to social change. The fact that many were Hindus and Muslims is of little relevance. Conversion had to be used as a pretext.
That is the context of the uproar against the Pope's call to conversion and ``new evangelisation'' of Asia. Some have misunderstood this recent Christian terminology with which they are not familiar. So their concern is understandable. To Christians today conversion is essentially of the heart. ``New evangelisation'' is primarily in the social field. Those who do not know this terminology can easily misunderstand it since it goes together with the statement that the first millennium was of evangelisation of Europe and the second of the Americas and Africa. The terms had a different meaning then.
But that is not the case with the habitual Christian-baiters who are orchestrating this uproar. To them it is one more stick to beat the minorities with and to deal with their own insecurity. They have taken the call out of context instead of seeing it as an integral part of the Synod document ``Church in Asia''. The theme of the Synod from which this document emanates was ``Jesus Christ the Saviour and his mission of love and service in Asia''. New evangelisation is proclaimed in the context of this service and love.
The document begins by situating Asia within its religious, social and economic context. It opens with the assertion that Asia is the cradle of religions such as Judaism, Islam, Christianity, Hinduism, Buddhism etc. It insists that they deserve the greatest respect because their ``profound philosophy and wisdom have made Asia what it is today''. Looking at the socio-economic scenario, it discusses globalisation and a purely profit-oriented economy of which most Asian countries are victims. It states that the inequalities witnessed in Asia are intrinsic to this economy. It situates the East Asian economic crisis within this context and speaks of the ``many painful questions posed by the suffering, violence, discrimination and poverty to which the majority of Asian peoples are subjected''. The call to conversion and ``new evangelisation'' is made in this context. In recent decades most Christians have come to use ``new evangelisation'' to mean fight against social injustice and inequalities. They believe that Jesus died that we may have new life. They view this injustice as social death. Baptism is not the end of their struggle.
That is why there have been several martyrs of this cause in our own country. For example, Sr. Sunita Mary was murdered near Indore in 1995 and Fr. A. T. Thomas near Hazaribagh in 1997. Both of them were fighting for the freedom of bonded labourers. That was a threat to those with a vested interest in their poverty. The Deep Darshan High School at Ahwa in Gujarat was attacked by alleged Sangh Parivar activists on Christmas day 1998. As the report of the Independent Commission that inquired into the attacks on Christians in Gujarat states, the reason for it is not conversion. Most of its students are tribals, only 10 per cent of them Christians. The real crime of the management is that they teach the students the forest laws and what they are to do when the police arrest their parents. So this education is a threat to the vested interests. They use religious conversion as a bogey to prevent the tribals from being exposed to this secular education.
These are the vested interests behind the uproar against the call to conversion and a new evangelisation. Those orchestrating it have read the document and know the context. But they take it out of context in order to create an opinion against any move that can lead to equality. Caste has to be maintained and the poor have to be suppressed in order to maintain a minority in power. Any move against it has to be condemned. But those with commitment to human equality will respond positively to the call to conversion of heart and a new evangelisation that involves struggling for justice to those who are treated a sub-humans.
(The writer is Director, North EasternSocial Research Centre, Guwahati.)
