
YOU are in the first days of a new millennium. Some of you may sad that it feels just the same as the old millennium. In reality, however, it should start feeling quite different very soon. Beginning on January 12, 2000, Saturn, the planet of karma, will return to direct motion in Taurus. Normally, this is not such a big deal. But this year, Saturn, which rules the structure of government and law and order, will also conjoin with Jupiter in Taurus on February 15. Whenever Jupiter and Saturn come together in Taurus, a completel governmental and societal restructuring generally follows. The conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn last occurred in 1940, during World War II.
Now, 60 years later in 2000, many of the same players from World War II are on the world stage again - Russia, Yugoslavia, Germany, the U.S. and recent peace talks also highlighted the Middle East. The potential for another global restructuring seems highly likely.
The threat of conflict is still great. But global leaders are more conscious now of the need for peace and global community. The challenge with the Jupiter-Saturn conjunction in Taurus is how to meet the needs of all the players while incorporating spiritual values such as brotherly love. The challenge of integrating the material and the spiritual in the process of creating new, more viable governing structures is quite apparent in the global aerna. The need to restructure the foundations of your own life so that you can balance the material and the spiritual is also of vast importance at this time in your personal life as well. It will be help if you use this time to reflect upon any areas of your life that are out of balance. Are you so involved with material responsibilities that you have no time for spiritual pursuits? Or are you so absorbed with your spiritual practice that you have neglected your material responsibilities? What can you do to bring your life into balance? Is there something in the fundamental structure of your life or belief system that you can change to enable you achieve harmony and balance?
The first few weeks of the new millennium will support your inner reflection. Use this time to meditate on deep levels of your life. This is not a time to think about whether you should buy a new home or a new suit of clothing. Rather, it is time to decide why you have come into this world, and to think about what you want to achieve and experience. It is time to ask yourself whether you've established the proper conditions to bring your true purpose to fruition. It won't be helpful right now to blame others for the condition of your life. Taking self-responsibility is the only couse that will lead to greater fulfillment.
Other planetary shifts to be aware of are lunar and solar eclipses on the horizon in late January and early February. There will be a lunar eclipse on January 21. The Sun in this eclipse is in the first degree of Aquarius and the Moon is the first degree of Leo (in western astrology). This celestial alignment also portends a whole new beginning for humanity.
A solar eclipse on February 5, also the same day as the Chinese New Year of the Dragon, will impart an even greater impact. This solar eclipse in Aquarius conjoin the planet Uranus. This configuration portends dramatic, revolutionary global change. New ideas, visions, and possibilities will run rampant. Tune into what you are thinking. Jupiter in Aries will make you more prone to take a risk, start a new venture, pursue a business idea, or make a significant change in the direction of your life. Interestingly, even though things may not turn out the way you planned, the outcome will be better than you have imagined and will lead to a whole new life. The details of what you do at this time are not as important as experimenting with changes that will bring your life in line with your soul's true purpose.
This is a period of human history that will be marked by radical change for everyone. In your own life, think about the kinds of change that you might make. They can be small or large - anything from changing your daily routine to changing your career or adopting a new philosophy. Even though some of the changes may seem inconsequential now, you will see that the reorientation you experiement with during the first month of the millennium will actually define the whole new direction of your life - for the rest of your years. It is not possible to be alive now without undergoing some kind of deep and dramatic change!
Imagine that you are building a house. That is your life. You decide to change the foundation you are laying. Small deviations from the original plan actually produce dramatic differences in the final outcome of your project as you continue to build. That will be the theme of your life as these first weeks of the millennium unfold. Small changes now will produce large changes later.
The only thing worse than making small changes in making no changes at all. The old structures are going to crumble no matter what. You might as well get a head start building the new structure the way that you'd like it to be. Start to think about ideas that you've had in the past that you may have ignored. Or remember dreams that you've had that you never thought possible. Create a picture in your mind of what your new life could look like. The possibilities for taking small steps toward this new direction will magically fall into place as this year unfolds.
Reorient yourself at every step and during the first few weeks of the new millennium. Start slow at first. Review the past. Think about the future. Change one thing at a time in the structure and direction of your life. Complete any tasks left unfinished from the last year or mieeennium. As soon as Saturn turns direct on January 12, get ready to hit the ground running. Your willingness to change will prove highly beneficial in the future.
LAURIE BAUM
