
ITS NATIVE name, ``Tihayu,'' gave way overnight to ``sunrise island'', as the rays of the first millennial sun fell on the tiny Katchal Island in the central group of the Nicobar islands on Saturday.
But the hype and hoopla created by the global media, turned out to be a damp squib, as both the Andaman and Nicobar Island authorities and the Union Tourism Ministry were at pains to explain how it was a tourist event, as distinct from a Governmental get-together.
Even though few overseas tourists were on hand for the sunrise, in the wake of the Indian Airlines hijacking episode and the seven-day mourning for Dr. Shankar Dayal Sharma, which cast a shadow, Katchal saw a shipload of less than 300 passengers, descending on the fragile island. The sun-chasers were from Chennai, Maharashtra and Kerala.
``For me and my family, it was a life-time's experience. I wanted to be part of this millennial sunrise event at any cost and was planning it almost a year in advance,'' said a beaming Mr. Ejji K. Umamahesh, a resident of Kalakshetra Colony, Besant Nagar, from Chennai, celebrating the event in mid-sea aboard the ``M. V. Swaraj Dweep'' which anchored near the Revello Channel between the Nancowry and the Katchal islands, toasting the event with imported non-alcoholic pineapple juice.
``Only a few Andaman and Nicobar island authorities were enthusiastic and in the face of the non-responsive attitude of the officials of the Union Tourism Ministry, we had to pull local strings to be on-board the millennium voyage. I did not mind travelling by second-class cabin tickets though I was prepared to pay any amount of money to be here,'' Mr. Umamahesh said, about his quest for ship tickets.
If the affluent Chennaivasis managed to get seats in the second class cabin of the ship, the less-fortunate sections of society, who had come from various parts of Tamil Nadu spending their savings, were accommodated in the ``bunker class.''
The Lieutenant Governor of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Mr. I. P. Gupta, took pains to explain at a press conference that they are adopting a cautious approach to open the floodgates to island tourism. Most of the islands form a restricted area.
Amid these pitfalls in a picture postcard paradise, those present enjoyed every moment of the unique sunrise, in the midst of the Navy's patrol ships. INS Savithri displayed fire works, supported by ``M. V. Swaraj Dweep'' carrying the millennium voyagers, and announcing the New Year with the siren and ringing bell. It was both a visual treat, like Diwali being recreated mid-sea.
The lucky occupants of the ship who were part of the excitement, all had agreed unanimously on one thing :It was truly a sight that would be memorable for a 1,000 years. Pristine, quiet, and calm, ray of hope amidst a partly cloudy sky.
(By T. S. Shankar)
