
JIND, JAN. 2. Time and tide wait for none and in Haryana the ever-shifting political scenario is once again undergoing a major metamorphosis just before the coming mid-term Assembly elections. The political scene is very fluid indeed. The Chief Minister and Indian National Lok Dal supremo, Mr. Om Prakash Chautala, may find the going tough and he may well rue his decision to force an election 18 months before the due date.
For one, political observers say, the euphoria witnessed during the recent Lok Sabha elections when the INLD-BJP won all the 10 seats in the State is gradually fading. And the people particularly the jats and the ryots, who are regarded as the traditional supporters of the Devi Lal clan, are not being taken in by the so-called `Janata Darbars' being held by Mr. Chautala almost daily across the State.
A cross-section of people told this correspondent that Mr. Chautala was virtually on a promise-making spree even though the State economy is in bad shape. The announcements being made by Mr. Chautala and the endless sops being promised by him had little chance of being implemented and were more of an ``election gimmick''. There is resentment against the regime among the farmers as they feel `cheated' without any relief being given while the trading community is receiving the maximum benefits, so they feel.
The farmers are particularly sore with Mr. Chautala as he has not waived off the electricity arrears due from them. A farmer in a village near this district town said bluntly: ``We never expected the Government to give us free power but Mr. Chautala should fulfil his promise made before he became Chief Minister that the arrears of electricity bills should be waived off''. And instead of any positive action, the Chautala regime too was disconnecting electric supply like his predecessor, Mr. Bansi Lal. Instead of giving sops to the traders, the Government could divert funds to offset the loss to be caused by waiver of electricity arrears, another old man chipped in.
Moreover, there is resentment among lower and middle rungs of the INLD that Mr. Chautala may be pressurised into giving more seats to the Bharatiya Janata Party as this would spoil their chances of getting party nominations. Interestingly, there is a subtle change among the party workers' this time. They are not going to take any `impositions' lightly and their mood indicates that they may even defy Mr. Chautala's edicts if they find them `unpalatable'. Even though they may not support or work for the BJP nominees, they can lend indirect support to the Congress nominees if it comes to that. Earlier, Mr. Chautala's commands have been obeyed by all cadres of the INLD as any defiance has invariably strong repercussions.
Observers feel that in the prevailing scenario, it may be quite difficult for the Chief Minister to accommodate the BJP's demand for at least 35 if not 45 seats. Mr. Chautala has indicated that he would not succumb to any pressure from the BJP regarding allotment of seats and he has also ruled out creation of the Deputy Chief Minister's post for the BJP in the future set-up. It is being said in political circles that Mr. Chautala may at the most concede 25 seats to the BJP.
