
SINGAPORE, JAN. 3. The ``historic'' land border agreement between China and Vietnam, signed in Hanoi on December 30, capped a year of momentous political events heralding the new millennium in South-east Asia.
Vietnam is still in the process of integrating fully with the Association of South-east Asian Nations (ASEAN), especially with the mainstream countries such as Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore.
China, on the other hand, is of paramount geo- strategic importance to all the ASEAN States, not merely because Beijing's territorial disputes in the Spratlys with several South-east Asian countries, including Vietnam still remain unresolved. Viewed against this collective security consciousness, the latest Sino-Vietnamese land border accord brought cheer to the entire South-east Asia even as the year-end recrudescence of inter- religious violence in Indonesia's eastern Spice Islands completely eclipsed the region's frenetic preparations to be Y2K ready.
The border accord - signed by the two Foreign Ministers, Mr. Tang Jiaxuan of China and Mr. Nguyen Manh Cam of Vietnam - relates to a delineation in over 100 disputed sectors. This now sets the stage for intensified negotiations for an accord on their maritime boundary in the Gulf of Tonkin.
The foreign policies of the ASEAN countries led to a flurry of new ideas such as an East Asia Security Forum (proposed by the Philippines President, Mr. Joseph Estrada), an East Asia Monetary Fund (the Malaysian leader, Dr. Mahathir Mohammad's initiative) and a five-power ``entity'' comprising China and Japan, besides India as also Indonesia and Singapore (a concept visualised by Indonesia's new President, Mr. Abdurrahman Wahid). Singapore's Prime Minister, Mr. Goh Chok Tong, had played a stellar role several years ago in architecturing the Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) as a trans-continental association and in facilitating India's entry into the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF), a high-profile political-security-oriented association.
Tumultuous events in Indonesia and Malaysia during 1999 settled questions regarding the legitimacy of the rulers beyond a shadow of doubt, although Dr. Mahathir's status was never questioned in law despite the efforts by his key opponent and former heir- apparent, Mr. Anwar Ibrahim, to do so. Mr. Anwar's conviction and imprisonment in April 1999 did not, in the end, affect Dr. Mahathir's triumphal return to power in a snap general election that he called in November.
However, the rise of Islamic fundamentalism as a political force in the latest Malaysian election is being resisted in that Muslim-majority country (in striking contrast to the experiences of Islamic States in South and South-west Asia). In Indonesia, an epochal sequence of elections - a direct parliamentary poll in June 1999 and the indirect presidential selection in October, both regarded by the natives as the first truly democratic exercises - brought Mr. Wahid to power.
The interlude of a U.N.-sponsored ``popular consultation'' or plebiscite in East Timor, the death and destruction that followed it and the territory's separation from Indonesia ranked as the foremost events of self-determination in the world this year. The lingering and related human rights agenda in Indonesia, a theme that applies to its provinces such as Aceh and Irian Jaya as well, is a sign of a new awakening in South-east Asia.
The economic crises in various ASEAN countries were, by and large, brought to manageable proportions by the year-end, except in Indonesia. The shining economic success stories were those of Malaysia and Singapore. They brought into focus the idea of ``a virtual State'' as enunciated by Richard Rosecrance in a new theory of international relations for ``the coming century.''
