
The Last Emperor - Ryuichi Sakamoto and David Byrne (Virgin - Rs. 125)
With more and more international music companies coming into the country, there is a wider selection of music being made available, including the much-neglected area of background scores of films.
One of the most successful sound tracks in recent times is Bernardo Bertolucci's "The Last Emperor". The Academy Award- winning score has some haunting yet simple melodies. The music that is a perfect marriage of Western classical notes with hypnotic Oriental sounds is superbly orchestrated.
Ryuichi Sakamoto has made use of authentic Chinese instruments, like the pipa lute, and a large orchestra. The result - some exhilarating and elegant pieces of music.
The other composer David Byrne, who once belonged to a band called Talking Heads, is one of the pioneers who explored the world music scene along with Peter Gabriel and Paul Simon.
Though there are two composers who have pitched in, there is perfect synchrony and harmony throughout and their styles blend very well.
While most of the compositions are original, also featured is Johann Strauss' "The Emperor Waltz" that is performed by the Ball Orchestra of Vienna.
Great music that is truly of epic grandeur! - Excellent.
* * *
Every Day is A New Day - Diana Ross (EMI Milestone - Rs. 100)
Celine Dion may have called it a day. But do not lose heart. There are still some great soul and pop divas who go on like Aretha Franklin, Tina Turner and Diana Ross.
Diana Ross is back after a hiatus of five years. This time, with an album of soul ballads sung in her inimitable tender, cooing voice and a singing style that inspired Michael Jackson.
"He Lives In You" is beautiful gospel number that blends African rhythms with jazz (lend your ear to the violin). "Love Is All That Matters" too has a overtones of the gospel style and is in the Aretha Franklin tradition. The rest of the numbers are middle-of-the-road pop soul and do not really stand apart. - Good.
* * *
Bhopal Express - Shankar-Loy-Ehsan (Sony - Rs. 65)
This album has an eclectic mix of artistes and songs. The surprise part of the package is Ila Arun, whose versatility is brough to the fore in two totally different genres - a classical piece and a mujra!
In the classical "Aaj jane ki zid na karo" her voice range is fully exploited. It simply makes one sit up! The number has no background music except the strains of the tanpura, which builds up a ruminative mood. Her aalap is simply superb. If that classical piece was that good, then listen to the mujra, "Uran katola", written by her that showcases a totally different aspect of her voice. The use of the harmonium here is effective. The song is peppy and raunchy, as it is meant to be!
The deep voice of Amitabh Bachchan is best suited for the recitation for which the lyrics have been written by Prasoon Pandey. Another highlight is Jagjit Singh's poignant ghazal, "Is Nagari Mein" that laments the loss of life following one of the worst ecological disasters in India.
To add beat and thump to the score is Lucky Ali, who belts out a pop number, "Tu kaun hai" while "Hum Kya Log Hai" by Sagarika, for which she herself has penned the words, is a slow, moody number. The lyrics, all them, bring out the desperation and gloom.
A fine effort! - Very good.
* * *
Nanba - Rohitraj (Pyramid - Rs. 45)
The influence of the Rahman style is quite obvious in this latest film track. Blending folk with pop, Rohitraj has attempted to produce some melodious songs.
Of the six tracks, "Kannae Kannae" (Srinivas) is a softer and slower number, while "Achacho Anarkali" (Rohitraj, Febi) is perhaps targetted at college goers! "Yen Mathalam" (T. L. Maharajan, Sangeetha) is a typical folk song, with the prominent percussion sounds.
A passable, functional score. - Fair.
SAVITHA PADMANABHAN
