
J.V.Siva Prasanna Kumar,
KANYAKUMARI, DEC.31. The two-day function organised by the State Government at the confluence of the three seas here to mark the formal unveiling of the 133-foot high Thiruvalluvar statue began here today with the Chief Minister, Mr.M. Karunanidhi announcing the institution of kural award for profficiency in Thirukural.
Making a formal announcement about the award when 22 children drawn from different strata of society exhibited their enviable skill in Thirukural recitation, the Chief Minister said all the children would get Rs.1000 each per month. The award would be sanctioned for any child who had similar profficieny. Mr.Karunanidhi, after listening to the recitation, said poet Thiruvalluvar's philosophy of equality and freternity had come alive at Cape Comorin. Those who recited the couplets included three children from the Islamic community. The Chief Minister said the award would be sent to the children from the Secretariat every month, irrespective of the party in power. Later in the evening, Mr.Karunanidhi chaired a poets' meet. A symposium of Thirukural researchers was also held in the day.
Earlier inaugurating book and painting exhibitions on the Thirukural on the occasion Mr.P.T.R.Palanivel Rajan, Speaker said the Thiruvalluvar statue was an epitome of the rich culture and tradition of the State.
Thirukural scholars from all over the country and abroad have confluenced here for the statue unveiling ceremony organised to herald the new millennium. The function is being held amidst tight police security, with policemen lining the road leading to the sea shore and assisted by a posse of perssonel from the Rapid Action Force (RAF). There was through frisking at the Public Works Department's guest house lawnms, the venue of the function.
There was no pavement shops at Kanyakumari as all the hawkers were evicted for the function. Even as partymen from all over the State flowed in, the police imposed one traffic regulation to decongest the town. Accordingly all vehicles passing via the Vivekananda Kendra from Nagercoil or Tirunelveli to reach Kanyakumari will pass via Kovalam road to reach Kottaram and Nagercoil.
Enroute the National Highway (NH47) upto Kanyakuymari the partymen have displayed party flags and the State Government has displayed numerous banners containing verses from the Thirukural.
