
VISAKHAPATNAM, JAN. 3. The Chief Minister, Mr. N. Chandrababu Naidu, had direct interaction with villagers of Peda Mushidiwada in Parawada mandal and Tallavalasa in Bheemunipatnam mandal on Monday when the 11th phase of the Janmabhoomi exercise began. The programme went on for more than half an hour at each village.
At both places, Mr. Naidu asked officials, right from the Mandal Revenue Officer and the nodal officer, down to the Village Administrative Officer and the health worker, along with the sarpanch and school education committee chairmen, to introduce themselves to the gathering.
Village resource persons - the students and their lecturers - who were staying in the village to participate in the Janmabhoomi also introduced themselves to villagers.
The Chief Minister then asked the villagers if the official or the sarpanch was discharging his or her duties up to their satisfaction. All except the VAO of Peda Mushidiwada and the ration shop dealers of the two villages passed the test by the people as well as the Chief Minister.
The VAO of Peda Mushidiwada was warned and the ration shop dealer was told to be careful as he was suspended once earlier. The Joint Collector was told to check the ration shop at Tallavalasa and submit a report by the evening.
There were some lighter moments also as the Chief Minister cross- checked facts with people. As the pupils of the local school answered all the queries about the headmaster, teachers and school at Peda Mushidiwada, Mr. Naidu quipped: ``Your Headmaster has given good tuition''. But the chairman of the education committee of the local high school was caught on the wrong foot when he failed to give the correct name of a girl who, he earlier said, was known to him. Then a boy was found to be studying in another school. When asked how many times he was visiting the school, the chairman replied: ``Once a week, because it is on my way''. The Chief Minister wondered if the chairman would visit once a month or two if the school was not on his way and told him to visit the school everyday and even teach Class VI as there were not sufficient number of teachers.
The chairman of the elementary school committee also failed to give the correct name of a girl studying in the school but tried to make up his fault by saying that the girl and her sister were look-alikes.
At Tallavalasa, the Chief Minister could find out a school dropout when the local school education committee chairman failed to do so. He pointed to an ordinary dressed girl, who was conspicuous among the uniform-clad children, and asked her if she was going to school. When the girl, Satyavathi, said she was not, Mr. Naidu looked for her parents and when they were not around, told the Collector to admit her in the Residential School in Bheemunipatnam.
