
KANYAKUMARI, JAN. 1. The Thiruvalluvar Statue, a colossus monument in stone for the Tamil bard, was unveiled by the Chief Minister, Mr. M. Karunanidhi at Cape Comorin today.
The ceremony marked the culmination of a two-day literary festival that featured symposia on Thiruvalluvar and his work, release of a compact disc and recitation of ``Thirukkural'' by children. The monument, installed at a cost of Rs. 6.14 crores, stands at the confluence of the three seas on the minor rock adjoining the Vivekananda rock memorial in the southern tip of the peninsular India. Its height signifies the 133 chapters of the ``Thirukkural''. The statue measuring 95 feet, is placed on a 38-foot-high pedestal (Adhara Peedam). The right hand of Thiruvalluvar with three fingers pointing skywards, signifies the three cantos of ``Thirukkural'' - ``Aram, Porul and Inbam''.
Conceived as a project by Mr. Karunanidhi in December 1975, following a representation from the late Eknath Ranade, the former president of the Vivekananda Kendra, the monument has taken quarter of a century to come to shape. The foundation for the statue was laid by the former Prime Minister, Morarji Desai on April 15, 1979, in the presence of the then Chief Minister, M.G. Ramachandran.After several modifications, the installation was finalised when Mr. Karunanidhi allocated funds in the 1990-91 budget. The actual work of sculpting the statue, led by Dr. V. Ganapathy. Sthapathy, began on September 6, 1990. The statue was placed on its pedestal on October 19, 1999.
The monument, seen as a cultural fusion because of its juxtaposition beside the Vivekananda rock memorial, has been built conforming to traditional Indian architecture. Accordingly provision has been made to provide a hollow portion inside the statue from toe to scalp but the tourists will not be allowed to scale. Instead they would be permitted to climb upto the foot of the statue at a height of 38 feet.
It has been planned to inscribe select couplets from ``Thirukkural'' on the outer periphery of the pedestal. The TMC president, Mr. G. K. Moopanar, the MDMK leader, Mr. Vaiko, Mr. N. Sankariah of the CPI(M), Mr. R. Nallakannu of CPI, Mr. Vazhapady K. Ramamurthy of TRC, Dr. K. Krishnaswamy of the Pudiya Tamizhagam, Mr. P.T.R. Palanivel Rajan, Speaker, Messrs L. Ganesan, State general secretary of the BJP, Kumari Anandan, former TNCCI president, S. Thirunavukarasu, thespian Shivaji Ganesan and Ministers Datto Samuel (Malaysia), Arumugam Thondaiman (Sri Lanka), Thirunavakarasu (Singapore) were among those who participated in the concluding session.
Earlier, a compact disc named ``Kottam Mudal Kumari Varai'' featuring two monuments in the State, the Valluvar Kottam in Chennai and the Thiruvalluvar Statue here, was released by Mr. T. R. Balu, Union Minister. The first copy of the Disc was received by Dr. V. I. Subramaniam, former Pro-Chancellor of Dravidian University.
The Tamil teachers drawn from all over the State took out a rally from Kottaram to Kanyakumari carrying ``Thirukkural'' placards. Mr. K. Anbazhagan, Education Minister presided. Mr. V. Mullaivendan, Information Minister, welcomed the gathering.
The scholars, who have translated the Thirukkural into other Indian and Foreign languages were honoured by the Chief Minister. Dr. Ganapathisthapathy, the chief architect and other sculptors were also honoured on the occasion.
