
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM, JAN. 1. The Central assistance to check the mites attack on coconut would be granted only after obtaining the reports by the experts deputed to study the extent of the damage caused by the menace, the Union Minister of State for Agriculture, Mr. Hukumdeo Narayan Yadav, has said.
Addressing a Meet-the-Press programme organised by the Thiruvananthapuram Press Club here today, Mr. Yadav, however, refused to specify a time-frame to grant the assistance for the State. The State Government had demanded Rs. 100 crores from the Centre to check the mites attack.
Mr. Yadav said experts under the ICAR and various other scientific agencies and universities were studying the situation. Once they submit the report, the funds would be allotted. In spite of repeated queries, the Minister did not mention a specific time-frame in granting the aid. The aid would be granted only in phases and not as a lumpsum. The Minister said the State Government should take immediate short-term steps and the Centre prepare a long-term strategy.
The coconut mite, Aceria guerreronis Keifer, was the most serious arthropod pest of coconut in the country. It was first reported in Mexico in 1960. Other than Kerala, the attack has spread to Karnataka and Pondicherry, he said.
Spraying dicofol, triazophos, methyl demeton and stem injection of monocrotophos were some of the measures being adopted now. The Project Directorate of Biological Control and All-India Coordinated project on Acarology are going ahead with the field and laboratory trials to develop effective biocontrol measures with natural enemies which offer an effective, cheap, eco- friendly and lasting solution to the menace, he said.
The long-term strategy should involve a biological control. In some countries, the fungus, Hirsutella Thompsoni, has been found effective, he said.
The Minister said the Government has plans to introduce crop insurance for all farmers from the next Rabi season. The Centre and the State would provide 25 per cent each of the premium for the small and marginal farmers. The insurance scheme would cover foodgrain, pulses, cash crops and horticulture products.
The former United Front Government had drawn up a model Act for farm workers pension. This falls in the social security clause and it was there on the National Agenda, he said. The Minister said funds can even be allotted to check mites attack from the Centre's natural calamity fund. But the State Government should invest one-fourth of the amount and the Centre would give the rest.
