
Sir, - In the piece, ``Chances for clemency wrecked?'' (TheHindu, Dec. 22), the thrust of Mr. V. Jayanth's argument is that the four persons sentenced to death in the Rajiv Gandhi assassination case need not or even must not be granted clemency in view of the LTTE's continuing history of political assassinations, the latest being the abortive attempt on the life of Mrs. Chandrika Kumaratunga, Sri Lanka's President. There is also a veiled attempt to dub all campaigners for clemency ``LTTE fronts''.
We in the Campaign Against Death Penalty would like to ask in what way the four persons condemned to death are connected with the ongoing murderous campaigns of the LTTE on the island?
We are first and foremost human rights activists who are unequivocal in condemning the human rights violations by militant groups as well.
We are campaigning for the commutation of the death sentence imposed on the four convicted in the Rajiv case because it is one of most visible and important events, considering not only the high profile of the victim but also the fact that the investigation and trial were conducted primarily under the draconian Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act.
The designated court awarded wholesale capital punishment to all 26 accused (the main perpetrators of the crime either absconded or committed suicide). The Supreme Court, reversing the judgment, informed the subordinate judiciary that it would not permit trial courts to convert themselves into kangaroo courts while trying political cases.
But unfortunately the apex court, while striking down the TADA charges against the 26 accused, held that confession statements obtained under the Act could be admitted as primary evidence of offences committed under other laws.
To arrive at this conclusion it has overruled and modified its own two very recent judgments. This is not compatible with the spirit of natural justice.
When we appeal to the President for clemency, We are doing so only in the light of the Supreme Court's clarification on Article 72.
It fully endorsed the view of the American Supreme Court: ``Executive clemency exists to afford relief from undue harshness or evident mistake in the operation of the enforcement of criminal law. The administration of justice by the courts is not necessarily always wise or certainly considerate of circumstances, which may properly mitigate guilt. To afford a remedy, it has always been thought essential in popular governments, as well as in monarchies, to vest in some authority other than the courts power to ameliorate or avoid particular criminal judgments.''
K. Manoharan,
Convener, Campaign
Against Death Penalty,
Chennai
