
ART AND money may make strange bedfellows, but not, as Shakespeare would have them, in misery. They are more like partners in the grandest scam in modern history. In the millennium we have just left behind, it seems that the main social function of art was the absorption of excess cash.
Public and private demand for not just impressionist, modern and contemporary works, but also prints and photography, Oriental art and primitive art has been rising thunderously ever since World War II. From pre-Columbian artefacts to contemporary photographs, as we update the records, look over the overlooked as well as the overvalued, and attempt at an analysis of our own, one thing is certain - unimpeded by the slump in the stock market and depression in real estate and other similar segments of business, the art market is not showing any signs of fatigue. Whither goes art commerce in the 1990s? As the late dealer Sam Salz said: "The pictures didn't become expensive. The money became cheap."
Ultimately money is no object. As the veteran art collector Jehangir Nicholson, whose private collection forms the Jehangir Nicholson Gallery of Modern Art, said: "Of course all these auctions by Sotheby's, Christies', Asprey's and others are important for the causes they represent, but in the end you don't want to buy art just for the cause. In that case, I would rather donate money. It is the intrinsic beauty of a work of art that we are paying for."
That the art market would commercialise was inevitable. The motivating forces are glamour, fame and status - these are the flames for the moths. After attaining houses, cars and directorships, culture remains the final status hurdle. When you are buying for status, you do not buy what you like, you buy what other people like or, more accurately, what people like you will freely admit to liking. It is as old as art itself and this trend is known as fashion. Fashion is not just taste, it is a collective opinion about matters that are unaccountable.
One would welcome an end to the bazaar atmosphere in the art world prevalent today. The touchstone for evaluating excellence in art is not to be governed by public opinion. Aesthetic expression should not be ruled by the common denominator. Art must indeed remain accessible to all, but the creative individual needs to operate within a framework that reflects integrity and commitment to our idiom that does not compromise on aesthetic values. No matter what the market trends are, art should be above manipulation.
ANJALISIRCAR
