
NEW DELHI, JAN. 3. The Government today released the criteria for issuance of out-of- turn passports under the Tatkal scheme. With effect from today, `Tatkal' passports can be issued within five days, provided the applicant met any of the 11 categories listed for the purpose.
Based on the experience, these categories may be revised at a later date.
A four-tier structure for payment of additional fee has also been prescribed.
The premium is based on the understanding that issuance of one out of turn passport disrupts the normal chain of issuing passports and involves the work and manpower required for issue of five normal passports.
Fresh passports to persons falling in the 11 categories will be issued within seven working days on payment of Rs.1,500 as premium in India and Rs.3,750 abroad.
Fresh passports can also be provided after eight to 28 working days at a lower premium of Rs.1,000 in India and Rs.2,250 abroad.
Duplicate Tatkal passports- in case the original one has been stolen or destroyed - will be issued within five working days on additional payment of Rs. 2,500. No premium will be charged in case the applicant is abroad.
Where the passport has to be re-issued after the expiry of the old one, the premium will be Rs. 1,500 in India and Rs. 3,750 abroad. The passport will be issued within five working days.
In addition to fulfilling the 11 categories , the scheme will be applicable only in cases where either the police verification report is not required or where a passport can be issued on post- police verification basis such as issue of duplicate or renewed passports without change in address, Government servants with NOC and application with verification certificates.
The categories would cover patients going abroad for medical treatment, death of a close relative (no additional fees in both cases), students appearing for examinations such as SAT or going abroad to join foreign universities, businessmen travelling abroad at short notice for conferences or expositions, blood relatives of a person residing abroad who is seriously ill, close relatives of a person working abroad, winners of a prize where foreign travel is the incentive, spouses if officials/passport holders going abroad and availing of a companion ticket, for marriage or honeymoon and persons going abroad to attend the marriage of relatives.
