
SABITA RADHAKRISHNA
It was on a hot, humid morning in August that I was telling the children a story about Baaka Kaaka, the cunning crow. And there he was, as the maid hung the washing, perched on the iron rail in our balcony. His eye did not miss a thing. The maid shooed him away but, as soon as her back was turned, Baaka alighted on the balcony rail again. Divya, Aditi and Aditya spread their toys on the mat in the balcony and started playing. Baaka bent down to see what they were up to. When he realised there was nothing for him, he left, disappointed.
After the children cleared their toys , I saw Baaka Kaaka sitting on the clothesline. He was tugging at my petticoat string. Finding it impossible to remove, he rummaged in the waste paper basket, and went off with a rolled piece of twine and came back to collect old pieces of plastic, some rags and whatever he thought was useful. "Children!" I called "Baaka Kaaka is building a nest!"
Every morning we would watch. The clever bird would collect twigs. The children began to bring their toys inside, as Baaka loved to pick up some of the things they played with. The nest was slowly taking shape on the tree outside the children's window. One day Baaka Kaaka brought his wife Baaki Kaaka for a final choice on furnishings. She was smaller than Baaka and round. She fluffed her wings which made her look fatter, shook her head and flew back to her nest. Probably she knew that Baaka would be the best bird to decide on the decor.
The children, who were visiting, left and I promised to write about Baaka and Baaki Kaaka. "One fine day, I saw Baaki sitting in the nest with her wings half spread out and Baaka was circling over her and shouting "Caw, caw, caw." He seemed impatient. I was going out for the weekend and, when I returned, the first thing I did was to look at the net. There was chirping, cawing and such activity.I saw four little black heads, bobbing up and down, with their little mouths open and very red. There was Baaki Kaaka feeding them with morsels, not fast enough, I am afraid, as they looked so hungry, with their beaks open all the time. Baaka Kaaka hung around, collecting whatever he could and flew to the nest as fast as he found them.
"Many days have since passed and the little crows have grown bigger. One day I saw Baaki push a little crow out of the nest. The little one spread its wings, tried to fly and flopped back into the nest. Each baby crow had his or her chance. Some were dizzy, some were happy that they could fly. One little bird just plonked to the ground, and Baaki Kaaka flew down to pick it up. And so it went on. Now the nest is empty, and I don't see Baaki Kaaka.
"One day you too will want to leave the nest. Your parents will want to see you live your lives and build your nests. The birds and animals forget their parents when they grow up. But you will not. You will remember them with love, because you can think and understand. And when your parents are old, you will take care of them just as they looked after you when you were small.
"Baaka Kaaka still visits the balcony and watches the washing being hung. He must be wondering where you children have gone. Or may be he is planning a new nest with a different design, on a different tree!"
