
In Bangladesh, rightists and religious fundamentalists have united and pledged to overthrow the Sheikh Hasina Government. HAROON HABIB takes a look at the scene.
THE POLITICAL scene in Bangladesh has not changed significantly though Sheikh Hasina Wajed's Awami League is going to complete four years in office in next few months. The scenario is almost the same as when the Awami League began its second term after long 21 years out of government following 1975's bloody political changeover.
But certain developments have given rise to a new polarisation in politics. Rightists and religious fundamentalists have united and pledged to ``overthrow'' the Government before its stipulated five-year tenure. They recently formed a four-party alliance under the stewardship of the former Premier and now main Opposition leader, Begum Khaleda Zia, chairperson of the BNP. Begum Khaleda's long-time arch enemy, Gen. H. N. Ershad, is now also with her on the same mission - remove Sheikh Hasina come what may. Their argument is that the Hasina Government is not only repressive but is also sacrificing national interests to India.
The coming together of Begum Zia, Gen. Ershad, a former President who heads the Jatiya Party, Prof. Golam Azam, Ameer of the Jamaat-e-Islami leader, and Maulana Azizul Huq and Mufti Fazlul Haq Aminee of the Islami Oikya Jote (IOJ) is seen as the ultimate and natural culmination of their political positions since they all believe in Islamisation of the state and share a strong anti- India view. In fact, their main charge against Sheikh Hasina is that she is appeasing India. Other charges are that the ruling party has resorted to terrorism, rigged byelections and not allowed the Opposition to speak in parliament. But the fact is that the Opposition parties started boycotting the sessions from the day the seventh Jatiya Shangsad - parliament - began.
But the polarisation has also possibly started sharpening the feelings on the other side which believes in the secular and pro- liberation spirit, the spirit behind Bangladesh's separation from Pakistan.Besides the Awami League, smaller left-leaning parties and groups too have become alarmed following the recent unity of fundamentalists and anti-liberation forces.
For the last one year, the BNP and its partners have conducted what they termed the ``One Point Movement'' - to oust Sheikh Hasina from power through a mass movement. At the end of November, they formalised their alliance and issued a joint declaration asking the Government to quit and declare general elections under a neutral caretaker dispensation.
The politics of agitation the Opposition alliance has so far pursued to force the Government to step down was mainly concentrated on hartals (general strikes) - they were organised for days on end. But the hartals, which cripple the economy, increase social unrest and worsen law and order, are earning widespread condemnation from the public. As a political weapon, the hartal is gradually losing its edge due to overuse. Therefore, it is almost certain that mere hartals cannot possibly bring the Government down, particularly when it has been mandated by the people to run the country for five years.The Sheikh Hasina Government has earned both bouquets and brickbats during its four years in office. Many of its landmark achievements, acclaimed worldwide, have been condemned by the Opposition, mainly because the policies are totally different from those of the past. There is also a fundamental shift in Dhaka's policy towards its neighbours, particularly India. And, the Government, despite shortcomings, is trying to boldly re-establish the secular, pro- liberation spirit which the country lost after the 1975 coup.
The Begum Khaleda-led front is most likely to emerge as an electoral alliance. But many political commentators do not agree with the calculation that the BNP-led alliance is certain to sweep the polls given the electoral arithmetic so far. They point out that the alliance is now almost entirely guided by political and religious extremists, many of whom are branded as ``pro- Pakistan''. These elements will not find it easy to get popular mandate. The main Opposition BNP has also a substantial number of leaders and workers who will never vote for the Jamaat-e-Islami or the Jatiya Party.
The Ameer of the Jamaat-e-Islami recently led an Iftar Munazat (prayer) at a city community centre which Begum Khaleda, Gen. Ershad and other fundamentalist leaders attended. Here, Prof. Golam Azam expressed his desire to lead the four-party alliance to re-establish the spirit of 1947's partition of India - that is the Two Nations Theory - which was, however, discarded through the emergence of Bangladesh in the 1971 war of liberation. In fact, the formal launching of the alliance in late November, 1999, has given rise to new hope among the divided religious extremists, who have finally found a platform under Begum Khaleda's leadership.
On December 29, Sheikh Hasina expanded her Council of Ministers raising the strength to 45, inducting a number of senior party leaders. It was a major shakeup and also an indication that the ruling party is getting ready for elections. By all available indications, the general elections in Bangladesh are likely to be held ahead of schedule.
