
KATCHAL ISLANDS (ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR ISLANDS), JAN. 1. In the breathtaking calm of the sea and virgin nature, the first ray of the millennial sun fell on Katchal island, 230 nautical miles south of Port Blair, the capital of Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
As inaudible sighs of expectations of millennium watchers atop the special chartered cruise liner, ``M. V. Swaraj Dweep'', that anchored off at Katchal island, rose to a crescendo, the gleaming first yellow rays appeared over the postcard paradise at 5-29 a.m.
The ecstatic outbursts of more than 300 millennium watchers including the special invitees of the Union Ministry of Tourism, that comprised the national and international media, besides a handful of overseas tourists, accompanied the rising sun. It was an excitement of a lifetime. The only disappointment was that the sunrise watchers could not see it rising from the horizon, because of the clouds covering the sun.
The occupants of the ship took vantage positions at the uppermost deck of the cruise liner. Photographers and whirring television camera personnel stayed awake overnight, as they did not want to miss an opportunity of a thousand years.
``We are fortunate that the sun God has bestowed the honour of making the first ray fall on the remote Katchal island``, was how the Lt. Governor of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Mr. I. P. Gupta, described the rare visual, beholding it from the anchored vessel.The captain of the millennium voyage ship, Mr. Srinivas Seshadri, said that it was a voyage with a difference. Mr. Ramesh Narayanaswamy, Chief Secretary of the Andamans hoped that the sunshine would provide the much needed impetus to the island tourism promotion.
Mr. J. R. Steffan Gnanayathum, Chief Facilitating Officer, of the Foundation for Action Based Learning and Research, a Chennai- based NGO, claimed that he was the first to have informed the Tourism Ministry about the dawn of the new millennium at Katchal island. He said: ``I am really happy this millennium voyage and the maiden sunrise spectacle took place as predicted at Katchal. I am delighted to celebrate this day as the peace day-2000 so that the planet can sustain for one more millennium.''
Katchal island, which was just another dot on the world atlas, became the cynosure of all eyes only during the first months of 1999. Travel-trade representatives, media and overseas tourists started exploring the ways and means to reach Katchal, as the Royal Greenwich Mean Time Observatory, revealed that this island was going to witness the first sun rays of 2000.Katchal island has very limited basic amenities like transport, drinking water, electricity and medical facilities. Yet, the millennium revellers aboard the ship did not lose heart nor did their spirits dampen.
