
After she was nominated to the National Commission for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in June, Veena Nayyar, the non-Dalit member in the Commission, has concentrated her energies on creating certain basic tools that the Commission needs to become more effective. The first requirement, before we can proceed further is a baseline data on the 250 million Dalits in the country, she tells R. K. Radhakrishnan.
``IT IS time that we got away from tokenism and started getting our act together. Instead of large sections of the well-off society making snide remarks at the continuance of reservation, it will be worthwhile if they sit back and take stock as to why the lot of the weaker sections has not improved the way it ought to have,'' says Veena Nayyar.
``There has been some improvement in the Dalit condition in the past 50 years. But that is not enough. Though reservations are not a final solution, they are needed at this point of time. Of course, much more needs to be done and the initiative has to come from the affected section themselves. They have to realise their position and get together,'' says Veena, founder-president of the NGO, Women's Political Watch. The organisation has been at the forefront of the movement to ensure that the Bill aimed at giving women 33 per cent reservation in Parliament was not consigned to history.
There are many similarities in the condition of women in general and that of dalits. Hence, the switch from that of a feminist- issue campaigner to a Dalit Commission member was not difficult. ``Just before the Bill was introduced in Parliament we had met the Prime Minister. He told us that the road ahead was difficult but the Centre was committed to introducing the Bill,'' she adds. The NGO she heads and like-minded organisations will keep up the pressure on political parties.
She was in the city to inaugurate a Dalit women's conference, organised by the Dalit Liberation Education Trust, on Thursday. Three weeks ago, she was visiting villages in Perambalur and Cuddalore, investigating and chronicling the atrocities on dalits in the area, ``which has been going on ever since the recent Lok Sabha elections. ``There are many cases of violence on Dalits by non-Dalits. These have to be charged under the relevant prevention of atrocities Act and not under the IPC,'' she says. ``But to my shock I find that many of the cases have been charged under the IPC. One reason advanced is that since the provision under the prevention of atrocities Act is much harsher, the IPC has been invoked. This is wrong,'' she adds.
Her first few months at the Commission convinced her that the major need was a national sample survey on Dalits. ``We need some point to start with. Every fourth Indian is a Dalit. Unless we have a firm basis of what their status is at this point of time, how are we to find out if his or her condition has improved or gone down a couple of years from now,`` she asks.
The SC/ST Commission has to be able to deal with Dalit problems on a much larger scale, preferably at the district-level directly, she says. ``I have been looking at capacity building apart from review and evaluation. There is still a long way to go,`` she says.
``Looking back, though a lot has been done by the Commission, the work ahead is daunting. It is an endless job. The Commission will be relevant for many more years to come,`` she says. And about her tenure: ``Three years is too short a period. There is so much to be done. But I will do as much as I can,``she adds.
