
Since Mr. Jaswant Singh decided to accompany the three released terrorists to Kandahar and bring back the released hostages himself, we can assume that the Government regards the end of the hostage crisis as a feather in its cap. The truth is rather different. India has just been handed its most serious psychological defeat of the entire Kashmir war. Worse still, it has been humiliated before the eyes of the entire international community.
First, India has been forced into a de facto recognition of the Taliban regime despite its close links with organisations like Osama bin Laden's
Al-Badr and the Harkat-ul-Ansar. Second, the selection of the three hostages whom India agreed to release was a resounding victory for Pakistan. Mushtaq Latram is a genuine Kashmiri militant, whose release could breathe a new life into the Al-Umar Mujahideen and other pro-Pakistani groups. Given the popular disenchantment with the Farooq Abdullah Government in Kashmir, it might do more.
Maulana Masood Azhar is the founder - no less - of the Harkat-ul- Ansar, and the master architect of the Afghan incursion into Kashmir that began in 1992 and 1993. The release of Ahmad Umar Sayeed Sheikh, a British national, will boost international recruitment for the Jihad in Kashmir, for it will confirm that India is a soft target.
The third and most humiliating part of the debacle is that India sent Mr. Jaswant Singh, it's most respected External Affairs Minister in decades, to make the surrender to the hijackers. And India got literally nothing out of the ``deal''. After five days of negotiations, the Government has failed even to establish the identities of the hijackers. All that the world has are conflicting claims, by India - that four of them came from Pakistan on a PIA flight the same day and were smuggled into the IA flight's departure lounge, and by Pakistan - that they were Sikh and Hindu militants whom it had nothing to do with.
Pakistan was lying, as usual. The hijacking had all the audacity of planning of the Kargil invasion, and all the well-prepared disinformation that went with it. However, it is also clear from the many zigzags that occurred, that the hijackers had a high degree of autonomy, and planned the outlines of the operation at least on their own. In this they were only following the practice of their counterparts operating in Kashmir. Where they entered new ground - and therefore blundered - was in assessing the impact of the hijacking on international opinion, and working out how they would proceed in the face of the international response. Having been given all the infrastructural support they needed in Kathmandu by Pakistan's Intelligence network, they assumed they could simply take the plane to Lahore.
They received their first shock when, Janus-faced as ever, Pakistan refused them permission to land. In their confusion they accepted the pilot's suggestion to land at Amritsar. Their panic and fear - that they were losing control at that point - were the most probable causes of Rupin Katyal's death.
But something changed at this point that Indian negotiators were at a loss to understand. After Captain Dev Sharan had fooled the hijackers into thinking that he was desperately low on fuel and had to land in Amritsar, why did the hijackers suddenly decide to force him to take off even as a fuel tanker was on its way to refuel the plane? Why did they then try to fly to Afghanistan? When they were not allowed to land in Afghanistan what made them choose Dubai? And when they had been refused permission to land in Afghanistan the previous day, what made them fly directly to Kandahar the second time? Why, for that matter, did the Taliban refuse permission the first time, but grant it the second time?
It could not have been concern for the safety of the passengers since the plane was already on the ground in Dubai. Even if it took off from Dubai without permission to land in Kandahar, the Taliban was not obliged on humanitarian grounds to let it do so for the plane now had all the fuel it needed to fly to a dozen destinations. Even after the plane landed in Kandahar, why was the Taliban so distinctly cool to the hijackers, threatening even to storm the plane if they killed any more passengers, but end up as their protectors, forbidding an Indian commando assault and throwing a protective cordon around the plane? If the Taliban viewed the hijacking with distaste why did it agree to speak on their behalf to the Indian negotiators? For that matter, why did the Taliban take such pains to protect the identity of the hijackers?
All these anomalies disappear like wraiths the moment we make one simple assumption: from Amritsar onwards, the hijackers, and a little later the Taliban, were in constant touch with Pakistan. The little electronic marvel that made this possible is the satellite phone.
Here is what probably actually happened. When the plane landed in Amritsar, the leader of the hijackers in a panic, called his controller in Islamabad or Kathmandu. The latter must have screamed at them to take off immediately at any price, as the fuel tanker the Indians were allegedly sending to the plane could block its exit.
The controller may have told them to head for Afghanistan, saying that he would work something out. But the Taliban was either not available in time, were slow to decide what they wanted to do, or were sufficiently annoyed by Pakistan freezing their bank accounts and arresting a key Taliban aide, to make them beg for favours. At any rate, the plane was forced to continue to Dubai which may have been chosen because the UAE was among the only two countries, other than Pakistan, that had recognised the Taliban regime.
But Dubai did not want to get involved. Captain Dev Sharan undoubtedly saved the passengers' lives by forcing a touchdown at the airport, but thereafter it is a fairly sure bet that it was serious pressure from Pakistan, and perhaps an assurance from the Taliban, that made Dubai allow the plane to take off a third time.
