
The Government has been severely criticised for allowing the plane to get to Kandahar and not blocking it at Amritsar or Dubai. Most of the criticism is unjustified. Stopping the aircraft at Amritsar would have almost certainly made the hijackers start shooting the passengers. For, at that point they were in a panic, had not got to know their hostages and had not yet begun to savour the possibility of getting away with their lives not to mention their freedom. Delhi would have had to back down, or storm the plane. With fully keyed-up hijackers, this would have led to a bloodbath and possibly to the plane's destruction.
Where Delhi went badly wrong was that in its relief Delhi seems to have read too much into the Taliban's warning to the hijackers not to kill any hostages. It failed to remember until it was too late, that the Taliban was not going to help ``a country of Kafirs, that had been arming their arch enemy, Ahmed Shah Masood, and oppressing true Muslims in Kashmir''. New Delhi should also have assumed that the Taliban would never let ``Hindus'' shed Muslim blood on Afghan soil.
One did not therefore have to go to Kandahar to know that the Taliban would permit only one solution - an exchange of hostages for the acceptance of the major part of the hijackers' demands. Where the negotiating team failed miserably was in not having a clear bottomline and exit strategy for the negotiations. For this it is the feebleness of direction from Delhi that is entirely to blame.
For this the television revolution is at least partly to blame. Just as it brought the Kargil war into peoples' homes, television went into a tasteless feeding frenzy over the hijack episode. Lacking drama at the Kandahar end, it filled its news segments with the grievances of the relatives. And all that they had to say was that if Dr. Rubaiya Sayeed could be exchanged for five militant leaders just because she was a Home Minister's daughter, then what were just a few more in exchange for 160 Indians and an Airbus A-300? So utterly overwhelmed and demoralised was the Government by this incessant media barrage, that getting the hostages home quickly gradually became the only issue on its agenda. It did not occur to a single Indian spokesman to respond that the release of the leaders of the JKLF in December 1989 started an insurgency and a proxy war that has claimed 25,000 lives.
Sensing this weakness during the negotiations, the Taliban began to threaten not the criminals who had hijacked a plane and killed two human beings - an un-Islamic act by their own definition - but the Government that was trying to free them. If India did not come to some agreement with the hijackers, they would send the plane with all of the hostages out of Afghanistan. Thus, the option of sweating the hijackers' demands down to a simple exchange of freedom for hostages was ruled out - by the Taliban!
Delhi's second mistake was to leave the satellite phone out of its calculations. When every important terrorist in Kashmir has an INMARSAT phone, this was unforgivable. The manner in which the hijackers' demands developed indicated clearly that they were in constant touch with their ISI controllers in Islamabad. Firstly, they did not do what nearly all other hijackers have done - release at least the women and children. Had they wanted to retain a credible option of killing all the remaining passengers and blowing up the plane, this is the first thing they would have done. Who advised them not to do this?
Secondly, their demands were equally atypical. They first asked for the release of only Maulana Masood Azhar. Only later did they raise their demands to 36 prisoners and $ 200 million. Did this not strike the Indian negotiators as strange? The only logical explanation is that this error, too, was ``rectified'' after more instructions were received on a satellite telephone. The ISI controllers clearly understood that India would need a large fig leaf to hide its surrender. How right they turned out to be was shown by none other than the Prime Minister, Mr. A. B. Vajpayee, who claimed that India had ``succeeded'' in whittling down the original list of 36 to three!
Did India have another option? It did: the moment the negotiators realised that they were being manipulated, they should have withdrawn from the negotiations and told the Taliban that since the hijackers had sought shelter in their country it was their duty to see that the hostages came to no harm. But what if the Taliban too called India's bluff and told the hijackers to leave Afghanistan? Would India not have had to start all over again in yet another country? Would the imprisonment and torture of the hostages not have been prolonged? And might not the hijackers have done what they could so easily have done at Amritsar - killed many more of the hostages to press their demands, or blown themselves and the plane up?
Some element of risk would have remained, but as Mr. K. P. S. Gill, former Punjab police chief, has been pointing out, it had all but vanished. By the fourth day the hijackers were feeling so safe that they were allowing the passengers to move about freely in the plane, and not even bothering to guard them any longer. They had also come to know many of the hostages and that curious empathy, known as the `Stockholm Syndrome', had developed between the hostages and their captors.
As for flying away, would any of them have wanted to go back into the nightmare of uncertainty and terror they had known at Amritsar, over Lahore and at Dubai? And which country would have offered them a safe haven for a crime against India? Thus, if India had withdrawn, Pakistan would have faced the choice of letting them land on ``humanitarian grounds'' and thereby have the operation backfire, as did the kidnapping of six foreign tourists by Al-Faran in 1995, or advising them to release the passengers, blow up the plane and vanish into Afghanistan.
The truth is that India had a winning hand and did not even know it. As a result it succeeded in snatching defeat out of the jaws of victory.
(Concluded)
