
The putsch in Ivory Coast confirms that the West and international financial institutions have failed in their attempts to impose a democratic model on Africa, reports VAIJU NARAVANE.
IT WAS a Christmas coup. Soldiers grumbling for back wages suddenly mutinied and pent up frustration over a worsening economic situation in what has been considered one of the most stable ``democracies'' in West Africa erupted.
Mr. Henri Konan Bedie, the French-educated President who lived like a monarch, throwing champagne parties in his huge low-slung presidential palace in Abidjan, first took refuge at a French military base and then, as French troops readied to go to Ivory Coast, averted a crisis by fleeing to neighbouring Togo. In Lome, the capital, he and his wife and four children were warmly received by Togo's President, Mr. Gnassingbe Eyadema, one of Africa's longest-serving rulers and a personal friend of Mr. Bedie.
On December 27, the Rue the Commerce, Abidjan's main shopping street, was littered with torn cardboard boxes which once contained television sets and other electronic and household goods. ``The soldiers came here to loot. From 8 p.m., on Christmas Eve to 5 a.m. on Christmas Day they grabbed what they could, putting it on trucks and driving it away. Then came the ordinary thieves for the rest of the pickings,'' recalls a journalist, Ms. Rosa Zeguella.
Mamadou who works at Fraternite Matin, Abdijan's largest French language daily, said: ``We knew something like this was on the way. Bedie was pretty much hated in this country. He was the darling of the World Bank and the IMF which held up Ivory Coast as an example of prosperity and stability in the region. But he made the population pay a huge price. We would not have minded if he had set an example and lived a simple life himself. But everyone knew how much his wife spent on her shopping trips in Paris, what his French chef cost the state. We now have to see how soon the new military regime re-establishes democracy.''
The new Ivorian strongman, Gen. Robert Guei, first brought the situation under control by sending out military patrols with orders to shoot at sight. Abidjan returned to calm after two nights of rampaging and mayhem. He then received the oath of allegiance from the army, the chiefs of police and the customs. France prepared to send in 300 paratroopers ostensibly to ``protect'' the 20,000 French expatriates who live in Ivory Coast but in fact to rescue Mr. Bedie who had asked France for protection. ``If you do that,'' warned Gen. Guei, ``there will be bloodshed.'' The French heeded the warning and Mr. Bedie, who was persuaded to accept the invitation from Togo, left under French protection after making a half- hearted appeal for national unity.
Gen. Guei has now announced that the State's coffers are empty. ``They have pillaged the country. There is nothing left,'' he told a students union on Thursday. The National Salvation Committee set up by the new Ivorian strongman is expected to ``create the necessary conditions for real democracy with the perspective of organising just and transparent elections''. This confirms doubts that elections will be long in coming.
The putsch in Ivory Coast, which comes close on the heels of similar coups d'etat in Niger, Comores and Guinea-Bissau, confirms that the West and international financial institutions have failed in their attempts to impose a democratic model on Africa where power continues to change hands through guns rather than through the ballot box. Even in Ivory Coast, which was long held up as a model of democracy, stability and prosperity for the rest of the continent, true democracy never existed. Elections were rigged or were rendered ineffectual by an Opposition boycott and more often than not, the Opposition was bought off.
Mr. Konan Bedie was fighting to neutralise his opponent, Mr. Allassane Ouattara, who he said was of ``doubtful nationality'', when troops stormed his presidential palace. Mr. Bedie's own partymen have now deserted him to become the acolytes of the new regime.
The Ivorian Opposition is waiting to see which way the wind blows before reacting. Mr. Alassane Ouattara, who sought refuge in France after Mr. Bedie declared him ineligible for office on the basis of a ``constitutional legality'' and issued a warrant for his arrest, has refused comment. Unfortunately, Opposition politicians in Africa have too often to choose between a nosebag offered by the strongman in power and a seizure of power by force. There are very few civic organisations and little dissent or political freedom. African democracies are for the most part semi-authoritarian regimes which have acquired a democratic patina without giving up any of the old dictatorial habits. The press remains muzzled, information strictly controlled.
The refusal of African leaders to allow their countries to move towards real democracy, their refusal to allow the emergence of civil society and a true opposition has set Africa on a slippery slope. Increasingly, the army is likely to step in, posing as the saviour of democracy. ``If General Guei organises elections to give power to civil society, it would be a good thing. Bedie is quite likely to walk on gold for the rest of his life from what he has stolen from this country. He was not too democratic. Let us see what these people do,'' said a schoolteacher, Mr. Jean Tiemoko.
