
CHENNAI, JAN. 4. The selection of 600 candidates for diploma courses at the cooperative institute, Nagercoil, for 1999-2000, on the basis of an interview held in July 1999, has been set aside by the Madras High Court.
The Court held that the entire selection process was liable to be set aside, as it had serious infirmities, including the awarding of 50 marks for the interview. It directed the Registrar of Cooperative Societies and the Nagercoil institute authorities to hold fresh interview prescribing 15 per cent for the interview and make a fresh selection within a month.
In a batch of petitions, some of the candidates who applied for admission in the institute, sought a direction to select them for the course conducted by the department for 1999-2000.
The seats strength in the Nagercoil institute had been increased from 400 to 600. According to petitioners, there was a serious illegality in the selection process. There was no interview at all as contemplated in the guidelines. They also challenged the weightage given to the interview, which was one third of the total evaluation. They contended that the selection was done not on the basis of performance in the interview and higher secondary marks. Many of the selected candidates did not possess the required qualification and were selected only on political pressure and not on merits.
Mr. Justice P. Shanmugam said, going through the records ``I was able to notice serious infirmities in the selection'' which was liable to be set aside. On July 19, 1999, between 10 a.m and 8 p.m, 1,420 candidates appeared for interview. The selection committee assessed the intellectual ability of every candidate. Assuming that there was no break that day, a candidate would have got hardly 25 seconds, within which time, a candidate was questioned by four committee members on general knowledge, personality, attitude, etc. Therefore, the interview was a farce and a mere eye-wash.
On the next day, it was seen that at least 510 candidates had been interviewed; this meant each candidate would have been given 49 seconds for assessing the intellectual ability by four members. Clearly, there was no possibility of selection on this basis, the Judge noted.
Also, by going through the register of marks, it was clear that the candidates who had got higher marks in higher secondary were given the least mark in the interview; whereas the candidates with lesser higher secondary marks were given more marks, so that they got selected. The court having been brought to notice of such a ``high-handed arbitrary'' selection, could not simply direct the petitioners alone to be admitted. An arbitrary selection should not be allowed to go unnoticed, the Judge said and rejected the department's contention that the classes had started in August 1999. The training was not a course which could not be extended by three/four months. No prejudice was going to be caused if a fresh selection was ordered, Mr. Justice Shanmugam noted.
The Judge said the proceedings of the Registrar of Cooperative Societies and the guidelines awarding 50 per cent of the marks for interview was arbitrary.
