
CHANDIGARH, DEC. 31. Urska Vesenjak stormed to her second successive title as she blew Antonia Matic off the court with a 6-2, 6-0 victory in 45 minutes in the final of the Bakeman's $10,000 dollar ITF women's circuit tennis tournament at the CLTA Complex here on Friday.
The joy of the Vesenjak family was complete when Urska and Masa won the doubles title, beating the top-seeded Manisha Malhotra and Katerina Daskovich 6-3, 6-7 (2-7), 6-0.
It was a fitting climax to the stupendous run for the 17-year-old Urska, who braved a foot injury to end the millennium on a bright note, even as she denied a birthday gift to the 15- year-old Croat, in the singles final.
Having assessed the field on way to the title at Lucknow on grass, Urska knew how to handle her opponents on her favourite hardcourts. Her domination of the field could be gleaned from the fact that she conceded only five games in all to four opponents, and won five of the eight sets against them at love. Her only fight was against the top-seeded Katerina Daskovich of Yugoslavia, as she won in the second set tie- breaker, after taking a 6-3, 5-1 lead.
The long stint with Nick Bollettieri, apart from the recent stints with coach Niki Pilic, were beginning to pay for the abundantly talented Urska, who is based in the U.S. along with her sister Masa, at Orlando.
``I definitely did not expect such results when coming to India. I am very happy and will be playing more tournaments next year after taking a week's rest at home,'' said Urska, who collected $1600 and five WTA points.
Though she had a foot injury - a naviculocueniform ligament sprain on her left foot, assessed and treated by the tournament physio Rahul Madan - Urska played a solid game and hardly put a foot wrong this day. She had a 65 first serve percentage, fired two aces and committed a solitary doublefault. She faced only one break point, in the fourth game of the second set and came out of it with a service winner. She had 10 other winners, including three return winners, and committed only 15 errors in the match.
``Considering that I was not feeling good with my leg, I did not expect to serve so well,'' said Urska, who landed 13 of her 18 first serves right in the second set when she conceded a mere five points to her opponent.
In contrast, Matic struggled with her serve. She had only 16 per cent success with her first serves in the first set, as she got only four of her 25 first serves right, and improved it to 50 per cent in the second, but to no avail. She had an ace and six doublefaults, and 10 winners. Matic had perhaps been drained physically while playing three-setters in the last three rounds, and thus it was no surprise that the frail girl committed 35 unforced errors.
``I felt alright with my body, but perhaps did not concentrate well. The defeat had to do something with my mind rather than the body,'' said Matic, who was not able to return with her usual flair, though there was a glimpse of the game that had seen her reach this far, towards the end of the second set.
The unranked Matic was happy to get her biggest purse, $1000 and four WTA points, on her 15th birthday.
There was no happy ending to the millennium for Manisha Malhotra, as she and Katerina Daskovich lost the doubles final after a good fight, to the Vesenjak twins, Urska and Masa.
It was a commendable fare from the Vesenjak sisters, to have improved upon their runner-up performance at Lucknow. They did well to run away with the final set at love, after losing the second set in the tie-breaker. Manisha and Daskovich fought brilliantly to even the score after having trailed 0-4 in the second set, but did not have the intensity of focus of their rivals in the decider.
Manisha had won her third doubles title at Lucknow in the company of Ka-Po Tong of Hong Kong, but could not play at her best in the end, when the Vesenjak sisters made a final charge, firing on all cylinders.
The doubles winners collected $650 and five WTA points, and the losers had to share a purse of $350 and got four WTA points each.
The Governor of Punjab, Lt. Gen. J.F.R. Jacob, gave away the prizes.
The results (finals):
Singles: Urska Vesenjak (Slo) bt Antonia Matic (Cro) 6-2, 6-0.
Doubles: Urska Vesenjak/Masa Vesenjak (Slo) bt Manisha Malhotra (Ind)/Katerina Daskovich (Yug) 6-3, 6-7 (2-7), 6-0.
