
CHENNAI, JAN. 3. Mr. Dinesh Dalmia will relinquish charge as the Managing Director of the city-based DSQ Software on January 17 when Mr. Arun Talani takes over as the Chief Executive Officer.
This decision comes in the wake of the company raising Rs.275 crores through a preferential allotment of one crore shares of Rs. 10 each at a premium of Rs. 265 to nine select outfits.
The nine who have got preferential allotment of shares are Credit Suisse First Boston A/C Kallar Kahar Investment Ltd. (30 lakh shares), BankAmerica International Investment Corporation (20 lakhs), Empire International Holdings (11 lakhs), Magnus Capital Corporation Ltd. (five lakhs), Brentfield Holdings (five lakhs), The Indiaman Fund (Mauritius) (six lakhs), Saimangal Investrade (nine lakhs), Classic Credit Ltd. (nine lakhs) and Dalal Street Investments Ltd. (five lakhs).
The preferential offer will bring the holding of the promoters (Mr. Dinesh Dalmia and his ilk) down from about 40 per cent to 22 per cent.
Addressing presspersons here today, Mr. Dalmia denied that his decision to renounce the position of Managing Director had any links with the preferential allotment. Nevertheless, he said, he would continue to be on the board representing his group.
The objective of the preferential issue is to repay the company's debt to the financial institutions. DSQ Software has an exposure of nearly Rs. 190 crores to the institutions. With the money raised through the preferential issue of shares, the company had already repaid some of its debts, he said.
The remainder of the issue money, he said, would be utilised for acquisitions and new businesses.
The ten member board of the company has three institutional nominees who are expected to go once the debt is repaid fully.
Mr. Dalmia indicated that a new revamped-board would have more professional directors.
Queried if the allotment price was in the best interest of the company, Mr. Dalmia said it was done strictly in accordance with guidelines laid down by the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI). Questioned further if there was any lock-in period for the shares allotted to the nine outfits on a preferential basis, he replied in the negative.
He claimed that all the nine had invested into the company keeping in mind their long-term interests. Nevertheless, the non- prescription of a lock-in period, it is felt, could mean that there would be no bind on these outfits to get out through the market route if they so desired.
Significantly, he also indicated that all corporate guarantees and inter-group loans would be liquidated within this financial year.
