
CHENNAI, JAN. 1.
Eight harrowing days in an alien land over, the seven persons from Vellore who were held hostage on board the hijacked Indian Airlines Katmandu-Delhi flight, returned to an overwhelmingly emotional reception at the Chennai Airport tonight.
Hundreds of relatives and friends breached the cordons of police and two Ministers to reach the hijack victims as they recounted their agonising tales of terror.
The stories of Mr. Prasad Babu, Mr. Perumal, Mr. R. P. Kannan and others were strikingly different from the ``soft'' accounts that emanated from Kandahar during the hijack drama. ``The hijackers were ruthless'', they said. ``They used all methods to push us into perpetual fear''.
During the first two days, the only thing that was in the air was fear for death, Mr. Babu said. The passengers were blindfolded and asked to remain bent down. ``Down, down, they kept shouting from time to time''. Each of them had a pistol and a grenade.
The hijackers, who were in their thirties except for a short man who appeared to be their leader, emptied the executive cabin and used it as their ``area''. Within the first hour itself, they frisked each passenger and beat up some people who had formidable physique. ``All of us got their fistings'', said Mr. Kannan. They took turns to sleep and to keep the passengers at gun point.
The passengers from Vellore had gone to Katmandu in a group as part of their trip of North India.
The conditions inside the aircraft became ``indescribable'' from the second day itself, Mr. Thulasi, another member of the group said. Only two toilets at the rear-end were open to the passengers and they became unusable after the first day. Unable to bear the stench and poor sanitary conditions, most of the time, women and children came out of the toilets crying. The toilets were cleaned only on the penultimate day, Mr. Kannan said.
After the hijack on December 24, the hostages went without food almost for 24 hours. The second day they were given the inflight food and on the third day, Afghani rotis. Then on, it was a highly rationed supply of food and water. The passengers themselves restricted food in view of the toilet conditions.
Mr. Kannan said the health conditions of the passengers were pretty bad. Two women suffered miscarriage and four men suffered heart-attack. Two doctors, including a French woman-physician treated them on Thursday.
Surprisingly, none of them knew about the death of Rippan Katyal. He was taken into the executive area, but never returned. They also did not know what provoked his killing.
The hijackers used nick-names to address one another. They called themselves ``Burger, Doctor, Shankar and Bola''. The fifth person, who appeared to be the leader, did not surface from the executive area till the last day. He looked ``serious''. Burger tried to be kind to the passengers. ``He was a bit decent'', said Mr. Perumal. All the victims hailed Captain Mr. Saran for his presence of mind and compassion for passengers.
Mr. N. T. Shanmugham, Union Minister of State, Mr. Gnanasekharan, TMC MLA from Vellore, and 18 relatives accompanied the victims from Delhi. Ms. Sarguna Pandian, Social Welfare Minister, received them with bouquets.
``It was the strength of the collective prayer of the entire country that probably helped us'', they said as the much-delayed drive back home on a caravan of 50 vehicles began.
