
CAPE TOWN, JAN. 3. England collapsed in a heap - a familiar position - on the second day of the fourth Test at Newlands and is threatened not only with defeat but also a chance to finish the series without a scrap of dignity.
It was all out for 258 from the solid start of 213 for three and so lost seven for 45 in 27 overs. ``I would be pretty disappointed if a side of mine had been all out for such a small score after the opening pair put on 115,'' said Graham Ford, the South African coach.
His side made 43 before Herschelle Gibbs was out, and Gary Kirsten followed his 14-hour 275 at Durban with another slow innings while Jacques Kallis hit yet another fifty as South Africa reached 200 for one at close. Kallis should have been caught behind the wicket to give Chris Silverwood his second wicket but, although he got his hand to the ball, Alec Stewart let it slip. The pair put on 100 in 32 overs, 150 came in 215 minutes and even on this slow outfield, South Africa is set for a long lead, especially as Andrew Flintoff has a foot injury which will restrict his bowling.
Of course all sides collapse; it's what makes cricket so fascinating. But a compilation of England failures might make a script for a horror movie. Forget the 46 all out against West Indies; that's too long ago. In the past three years it has been dismissed for 77 at Lord's to the power of Glenn McGrath and lost seven for 85, seven for 34, six for 46, seven for 87, eight for 83 and six for 32 in the same 1997 series. In the West Indies a disastrous series in 1997-98 ended with defeat in the final Test after seven were lost for 26; in Perth it lost seven for 50 and was bowled out for 112, seven for 70 in Melbourne and eight for 78 in Sydney. Against New Zealand last summer it was all out for 126, 199, 153 and 162; and at Wanderers in November it was four wickets for two runs and all out 122. If it is ever turned into a film, don't let the kids watch.
England restarted at 213 for five and was unlucky to lose Michael Vaughan to a quick catch at short leg, Kirsten's fourth of the innings. Vaughan was Allan Donald's 85th England victim at 22.90. Chris Adams, playing for his Test future, hit one smooth cover drive before he reached for a ball outside the off stump and edged it straight to second slip. Flintoff produced three heavyweight shots but off Lance Klusener's first ball of a new spell he skied the ball on the legside to Jonty Rhodes who had already saved one four with a spectacular back flip.
Darren Gough showed no caution at all as he was caught at the wicket and finally Phil Tufnell backed away from a direct fast ball from Kallis and observed the destruction of his wicket from the region of short leg. Donald had five for 47, all from the top six batsmen. It was his 20th Test five-fer, as the Austrlians call it.
It is little use damning the tail when the regular batsmen failed to take advantage of the start provided by Mike Atherton and Mark Butcher. Stewart's argument with Donald and his wild hook shot produced the climax of that wretched show and new proof that England still lacks the discipline to compete in Tests.
Every defensive shot played by Kirsten, chugging along at a run an over, was a reprimand to England's slap-happy batsmen. He plays for Western Province on this ground and can probably play on this pitch in his sleep - as his 215-minute fifty suggested he was - but an innings half as conscientious from an England player, and a score of 220 for two overnight, would have been a passport to safety. Instead they chose to play big shots and their carefully rebuilt house threatens to come crashing round their ears.
