
CAPE TOWN, JAN. 2. Three major England batsmen got themselves out in the crucial fourth Test at Newlands today after batting at least an hour. Allan Donald, often bowling at top pace, took the wickets of Mike Atherton, Mark Butcher, Alec Stewart and Andrew Caddick as he claimed four for 42 in 20 overs and took his series total to 20.
The sun shone brightly, a strong breeze ran round Table Mountain and its environs and the series between South Africa and England was tantalisingly poised; it was a good day for a cricket fan to be alive as we drove through the avenues of trees that lead from the dockside in this, the loveliest of South African cities to the suburb that holds one of the most beautiful grounds.
South Africa replaced Nantie Hayward with Jonty Rhodes and England brought back Michael Vaughan for Darren Maddy. Any thought of playing Alan Mullally vanished when he reported he had flu. Nasser Hussain won the toss and until lunch it seemed that they were about to turn the point from emerging talent to victors.
Atherton batted with supreme confidence from the start while Mark Butcher dug in at half the run rate but with a greater assurance in leaving balls around off stump. Heavens, how our expectations grew, particularly when Rhodes, yes, Rhodes let an Atherton catch slip through his fingers at cover and then a simple ground ball eluded him. All the noise from the South African fan-shaped rattles could not stop the feeling England were on top.
Fifty was on the board in only 81 minutes and 89 in 30 overs at lunch. For a minute, the England support dreamed of a series win, a ticker tape parade through Trafalgar Square, world domination even. The first hundred opening stand since the same pair put on 146 at Trent Bridge against South Africa in 1998 added to the fantasy. Reality was more severe.
An hour after lunch, Atherton flirted with a ball from Allan Donald outside off stump and next ball sent a flailing hook high to Gary Kirsten running and diving to take the catch at long leg. Hussain and Butcher dropped anchor but, after ten runs in ten overs, Butcher, who had been 41 balls on 37, drove another wide ball loftily to third man where Kirsten took his second catch. Donald's spell read 7-6-2-2, the figures of legend. Only 49 runs came in the session and only 23 in 15 overs after the departure of Atherton. South Africa was back in the driving seat.
The capacity crowd above 20,000 could not have had a more evenly contested match but when Hussain was caught at the wicket after trying in vain to get his gloves out of the way of a nasty curling ball from Paul Adams, the game had swung completely towards South Africa. To that point, Hussain had batted for 1,022 minutes in this series without being out. Adams, on his home ground and using the swirling wind, had bowled cleverly and looked as if he might be a match winner if his side were to win.
You could read the South Africans' decision to omit Hayward as a sign that they would be content to hold on to a 1-0 lead and that they felt no need to force the pace. Instead, they were on top when Alec Stewart walked to the wicket and although Vaughan hit two fours immediately afterwards to bring up 150, he was never fully in control of the shots.
Stewart, the perpetual cavalier, never allows the game to stand still and in 14 overs before the new ball, he, and to a lesser extent Vaughan put on 41 runs. Hansie Cronje, leading South Africa for the 50th time, grabbed the new ball straight away but Stewart, hooking and then hitting through Donald's quick ball, brought up the fifty stand and then missed with two wild shots.
Vaughan reached his highest Test score but Stewart pulled the ball to long leg and Caddick was caught at slip. He did not have to play the shot but don't blame Caddick. If his senior batsmen had performed, he would have been in the dressing room with his feet up.
