
THE DOCTRINE AND DYNAMICS OF SIKHISM: Dr. Jasbir Singh Ahluwalia; Punjabi University, Patiala-147002. Rs. 180.
OF LATE the much-maligned people whose highest seat of polity was desecrated by the government of the day to apprehend the so- called insurgents said to have been given refuge in the holy premises, whose mortally aggrieved protagonists took the law into their own hands and assassinated the Prime Minister of the country in broad daylight, whose enraged cult of violence plunged the entire State and its neighbourhood in a nightmare of terror and turmoil for an unending decade, have found in the author, a scholar of impeccable credentials, making a valiant endeavour to put the record straight, in the book under review.
In a modest volume of about 150 pages he talks about the essential values of Sikhism highlighting Guru Nanak's vision of pluralistic society, a concept currently much in vogue. He then takes a close look at the Order of the Khalsa ushered in by Guru Gobind Singh, the tenth Sikh Guru, followed by evolution of Sikh polity in institutionalisation of the Akal Takht as distinguished from Harimandir Saheb (The Golden Temple). Probably the most thought-provoking chapter in the volume relates to secularism and religious fundamentalism. The learned author winds up his treatise with a brief notice of Sikhism and inter-religious dialogue, more importantly with Bhakti movement and Sufism.
The Sikhs are time and again reminded that they must insulate politics from religion. The author asserts on the other hand that Guru Nanak ``socialised'' religion which at his time had degenerated into empty ritualism and esoteric practices. He maintains: ``Sikhism played a great historical role, leading a mighty crusade against religious discrimination, social differentiation, economic exploitation and political victimisation that characterised social realities in medieval India. With its progressive value pattern, Sikhism brought India on to the threshold of the modern age, investing sociological significance to its theological concept of the oneness of God.''
Sikhism is equally concerned with the soul's relation with God as with man's relation with the society in which he lives. Accordingly when the time came to lay down his ministry, Guru Gobind Singh invested Guru Granth Saheb, the holy book with ``Piri'', the spiritual sovereignty and the ``Panth'', the peoplehood, with ``Miri'', the temporal authority.
It is again symbolised in Harimandir Saheb and Sri Akal Takht at Amritsar. Also the fact that a Sikh wears one and not two swords after his baptismal ceremony shows that Sikhism does not advocate wielding of both spiritual and temporal authority by the same individual, howsoever distinguished he may be, as obtaining in Muslim Caliph and Christian Pope.
Accordingly, the author pleads for a radical change in the situation as obtaining in the Sikh brotherhood today: ``The SGPC (Shiromani Gurdwara Prabandhak Committee), free from its symbolic relationship with the Akali Dal, should concentrate on cleansing, modernising and updating the Gurdwara management, adopting modern means for propagating the faith. Further, the SGPC should devote itself to ideological issues, leaving it to separate political institutions and organisations to give political articulation to the Sikh consciousness. Sri Akal Takht should not be made into Akali Takht, this supreme institution of Sikhism should primarily concern itself with universalistic concerns of Sikhism and with such issues as have a bearing on the very being of the Sikhs.''
The author, having suffered the onslaught of religious fundamentalism recently, has devoted special attention to the chapter on secularism. Man's affair with God, the author believes, should be practised in the privacy of one's life. The state must be equidistant from all religions.
The Sikh people are no strangers to secular ideology and practice. Maharaja Ranjit Singh did not declare Sikhism as the state religion. The Punjabi language for which the present-day Sikhs crusaded for several years and had a Punjabi Suba carved out for them was never a state language during Maharaja Ranjit Singh's regime. His Prime Minister was a Hindu Dogra, Dhian Singh. His External Affairs Minister was a Muslim, Faqir Aziz-ud- Din. Similarly his Home Minister was again a Muslim, Faqir-Nur-ud-Din. The Maharaja gave to his Muslim subjects the rights of Shariat law.
Winding up his discourse on secularism he makes a highly significant observation that secularism in India today is at a crossroads, where, for its survival and sustenance, it requires two essential pillars of religious and political pluralism. Religious pluralism is insufficient without political pluralism; the two have to act as complementary to each other for ensuring a strong liberal, secular polity and composite national life.
The Sikhism, a religion of humanity of God and divinity of man, as projected by the author, should have little difficulty in stepping into the next millennium with grace. A title appearing not a day too late.
K. S. DUGGAL
