
BANGALORE, DEC. 31. The Bangalore-based George Foundation, a non- profit trust, has urged the Union Government to evolve a national policy for prevention and treatment of lead poisoning, which has lately assumed dangerous proportions.
This was a follow-up of an international conference on lead poisoning held in Bangalore last February. It attracted experts from 20 countries, who presented papers on increased incidence of lead poisoning in various parts of the globe. Over 100 million people were suffering from diseases and disabilities caused by lead poisoning in the country. A large number of them were children, pregnant women and industrial workers.
A recent study conducted by the Foundation in the seven major cities of Bangalore, Chennai, Hyderabad, Vellore, Mumbai, Delhi and Calcutta, disclosed that over 50 per cent of children below the age of 12 had elevated levels of lead in their bloodstream, well above the permissible limit of 10 meg/de.
A paper brought out by the foundation urged the Government to usher in urgent changes to long-standing industrial practises, including introduction of unleaded petrol all over the country and screening of drinking water, milk, food and other consumer articles for lead contamination. It called for regulating lead in industrial emissions and to make it mandatory for the paint industry to produce lead-free paints.
Heavy vehicle traffic in major urban centres, utilising leaded petrol, was the major source of high environmental lead concentration. Among the four metropolitan cities, it was found to be highest in Delhi, followed by Calcutta, Mumbai and Chennai. The increase in the number of two- wheelers was another major source of atmospheric lead contamination.
Yet another key source was the manufacture and storage of lead batteries. It was reported that the production of lead storage batteries in the country was around eight million and the estimated release of lead per 1,000 batteries was 11.35 kg. Of this, 5.45 kg was by way of emissions and the remaining 5.90 kg was part of waste effluent.
It was reported that small-scale foundries, secondary lead smelters and storage of lead batteries were a source of high blood lead levels among urban slum children in cities such as Mumbai.
It was reported that folk and herbal remedies and Ayurvedic preparations made use of both mercury and lead as active ingredients. The use of `surma' or `maiyee' containing lead and its compounds was another source of lead poisoning. Industrial effluents flowing directly into lakes and tanks were another major source of lead poisoning.
According to experts, the practise of re-coating the inner surface of brass utensils with a mixture of lead and tin (tinning), mostly in the southern states, was a major source of lead poisoning as the alloy had 55 to 70 per cent of lead. The lead leaching from pressure cookers, particularly from safety valves and rubber gaskets was another source of lead contamination. The lead content in Indian beer was another source.
The lead level in the blood of traffic police in Mumbai manning traffic junctions were found to be high, mainly on account of inhaling exhaust fumes. Frequent painting of walls of homes caused lead contamination as people constantly inhaled lead dust. Lead water pipes and soldering were another major source of contamination.
The workers of battery-manufacturing units at Vellore had high levels of lead in their blood. The Hyderabad study indicated high levels of lead in the bloodstream of children and industrial workers residing close to industries. The foundation recommended periodic screening of children, up to six years of age, for lead poisoning.
The traffic police, bus drivers and automobile mechanics in Chennai had high levels of lead in their blood. The auto-shop workers were also found to be suffering from lead contamination. The study revealed that smokers and alcohol drinkers had high levels of lead in their blood. Also, vegetarians had low levels of lead compared to non-vegetarians.
In Bangalore, lead contamination was mostly from lead water pipes, food containers and from inhaling exhaust fumes of automobiles using leaded petrol.
Nearly 86 per cent of lead emitted into the atmosphere was from vehicular emissions. The workers in soldering units, paint industry and automobile workshops had excessive levels of lead in their blood.
Lead contamination and poisoning had emerged as a major health hazard in most Indian cities. Although the Government had stipulated that by the year 2000, the oil companies in the country should supply only unleaded petrol, it was doubtful whether they were geared up to meet the challenge by inducting the required technology.
Lead was now recognised as one of the most toxic substances as it did not gel with the human body even at very low levels. According to experts, lead poisoning affected all organs of the body, including the reproductive and nervous systems. It also affected the development of the brain and the learning process among children, who absorbed lead five to eight times more, compared to adults.
Modern medicine can effectively treat lead poisoning through chelation therapy and use of chelation drugs.
