
CHENNAI, JAN. 4. With the decision of the Congress(I) high command to postpone the deadline for membership enrolment to January 31, the internecine feud in the Tamil Nadu unit of the party is likely to gather momentum.
Even on his first visit a couple of weeks ago, as Pradesh Election Officer, Mr.K. Sankaranarayanan, convener of the UDF in Kerala, tried to impress upon the leaders the need to sink their differences to enable smooth completion of the electoral process.
Divided are the partymen on one issue-continuance of Mr. Tindivanam K. Ramamurthy, as the State unit president when the electoral process is on. Those who are opposed to his leadership have suggested that a panel be appointed for pushing through the electoral process, while Ramamurthy loyalists are insisting on his continuance in office.
Mr. Sankaranarayanan, however, has reminded them that retention or change of the State unit leadership was the prerogative of the party high command and his primary concern was to complete the organisational elections in the State as per the AICC(I) schedule.
As of now the activities of the partymen in the State unit broadly fall into three categories. Aspirants for the post of the State president are frequenting Delhi to stake their claim and some of them have been meeting Mr. G. K. Moopanar, TMC president, on the presumption that he would have the final say in the matter. Some of the leaders are meeting in groups formulating their plan of action against the TNCC(I) chief while the official set-up led by Mr. Ramamurthy is doing everything at its command to create an impression that this group enjoys a broader support base. It is in this atmosphere that the membership campaign is going on.
Mr. Sankaranarayanan has been camping in Chennai since yesterday holding further discussions with party leaders, including Mr. Ramamurthy, on the appointment of district election officers and reviewing the pace of membership enrolment. In a chat with this reporter, he exuded confidence in his efforts to bring unity in the State unit of the party.
Some excitement and commotion are likely to be witnessed in the TNCC(I) and also the Pondicherry unit of the Congress(I) with the likely visit of Mr. Gulam Nabi Azad during the second week of this month. Mr. Sankaranarayanan and Mr. Azad are planning joint sessions with local partymen to achieve the twin objective of completing the electoral process and ushering in unity among the faction leaders.
This exercise is viewed in the background of the ongoing discussions between the Congress(I) president, Ms. Sonia Gandhi, and the TMC president, Mr. G. K. Moopanar in Delhi.
Meanwhile, work relating to the installation of a statue of Indira Gandhi by the TMC in the city is being speeded up and the expectation is that Ms. Sonia Gandhi will be invited to unveil the statue.
