
HIGHLY DISTURBING howsoever viewed - this latest hijacking episode. It is not the first case in the world where concessions had to be made to save innocent lives threatened by the brute, barbarous force. Agreed. The Indian Government did not have many options because of the problematical situation it found itself in and had to buy the freedom of about 160 hostages at a heavy price. Accepted. What is extremely worrisome is that India got projected as a soft state, that the mechanism and instruments meant to deal with emergencies were found wanting and the persons responsible for their operations failed to rise upto the challenge. The consequences look frightening.
What will be the international fallout of the hijacking case? Will India be subjected to increased international pressure on Jammu and Kashmir - regarded by most industrialised countries as the root cause of cases like this? Will it not mean a setback to the handling of an issue of the utmost concern, terrorism? In the domestic context, has not the Government's vulnerability to the Opposition attacks increased? Did the Home Minister, Mr. L. K. Advani, approve of the handling of the hijacking case, even if reports of his threatened resignation were to be discounted? How did the External Affairs Minister, Mr. Jaswant Singh, conduct himself when the focus shifted to diplomatic moves?
The ease with which six persons, armed with lethal weapons, breached the security arrangement for the Indian Airlines flight at Kathmandu, primarily the responsibility of Indian authorities, was in line with the free run that all manner of saboteurs, criminals, foreign agents and conspirators enjoyed through the length and breadth of the country. For years now, the intelligence agencies of a none too friendly neighbour have been operating not only in the border regions - Jammu and Kashmir, Punjab and North-Eastern States - but also in the interior almost with impunity. The law enforcement machinery has not been able to cope with the orgy of violence, bomb blasts, train derailments, kidnappings, extortions and open, daring attacks on police and para-military forces. There has been no dearth of strong words of condemnation but a matching effort to neutralise threats and counter terrorist activities has been missing.
The handling of the hijack crisis revealed some serious organisational gaps. Witness, for instance, the functioning of that apex body of officials at the Centre, the crisis management group. The inputs available to it from diverse channels should help it take a holistic view of the given situation and devise appropriate remedial measures. And, to be fair to it, the job was sought to be performed in all seriousness. But the public showed a lack of confidence in its capacity, because of the inability to produce timely results and, more important, its failure to avoid lapses of the type seen at Amritsar, where the hijacked plane was allowed to leave the Indian territory. The confusing, delayed signals from the Central panel, coupled with the absence of local initiative, proved costly, as was shown by the course of subsequent events which ultimately found the plane at the unfriendliest spot. No wonder, the panel came to be known as the ``crisis of management group''. The exclusion of the services chiefs from its initial exercises did not go unnoticed either.
Things were no better later when diplomacy and the foreign office were the chief instruments. They had to deal with the elements which till then were hostile and had not been recognised by New Delhi as the lawful master of the area controlled by them. Not only that, the Taliban, the authorities in Kandahar, last destination of the plane, as also most of Afghanistan, were under the influence of the regime in Islamabad, an adversary of New Delhi.
Mr. Singh will find it hard to live down the reputation of a weakling he acquired during the handling of the crisis. Among other situations, his stand will be scrutinised when he talks next time to ``my friend, Strobe'' (U.S. Deputy Secretary of State). He may find it harder to brush aside the criticism that he was too indulgent in the dialogue with the U.S. on issues arising from the nuclear tests. True, the crisis was not of his making - its origin could be traced to the lapses of the Civil Aviation Ministry or the failure of internal security - but what about the subsequent embarrassment the country found itself in? His account of what happened at the Kathmandu airport that the hijackers had disembarked from a Pakistan International Airlines flight before they boarded the IA plane - denied by civil aviation officials - was seized upon by Pakistan to absolve itself of any involvement in the hijacking. The delay in establishing contact with the Taliban and his action taking three hardcore terrorists to Kandahar aboard the plane he flew there to secure the release of the hostages were seen as signs of confusion and misjudgment. The hurried conclusions drawn from the stances of the Taliban at various stages and the shift in assessment of its attitude too could have been avoided.
Reports doing the rounds of Mr. Advani's unhappiness with the Government's decision could not have come at a more inappropriate time. He was stated to be upset at the manner the country's security was being compromised and new hurdles were created in the crusade against terrorist violence. His isolation in the Cabinet added to his pain - his stand appeared to have been supported by one or at the most two ministers of state.
The biggest lesson that New Delhi needs to learn is that it will have to conduct the fight against terrorism on its own, without too much reliance on others. This painful realisation stands out in the delayed response of other nations to the hijacking case. Despite all the hype about the resolve of the world community to take a concerted effort to combat terrorism, the pressures to end last week's tragedy came too late and were too little. Hijacking, per se, has been recognised as a crime against humanity and, as such, should not only evoke sharp, instant denunciations but also see such sentiments translated into operational measures. Nothing of that sort happened. A statement by the European Union, though belated, rightly reiterated ``support for the combat against terrorism in all its forms, whatever its motives and origin'', calling it a threat to internal and international security, to peaceful relations between States.
As against this, one has to watch the Pakistan television to know Islamabad's stand. The hijacking was described, on the one hand, as part of an Indian game plan and, on the other, as the inevitable consequence of the ``unresolved core issue''. Who played what role should be known to the vast intelligence networks of the major powers, some of which have been exchanging information with India. Apart from the condemnation by the U.S., E.U., Russia and some others of this terrorist act - delayed in some cases - there was no evidence of their looking at the direction pointed by the needle of suspicion, besides substantive evidence. The hijackers and the released hardcore terrorists have now gone to Pakistan, obviously regarded by them as a safe haven. Islamabad could be expected to take shelter under a fiction - that, as Kashmiris, they had gone to Kashmir. How the U.S. deals with the situation will be closely watched here.
It is heartening that diplomats of India and senior U.S. officials were in close touch during the hijack episode and that they examined ways of tackling terrorism, apart from the immediate problem. The proof of the pudding is in the eating. Here is a concrete case (the hijackers and the released terrorists seeking refuge in Pakistan). Could this development be ignored, now that the focus has shifted to the ``scourge of terrorism''?
The latest comment by the U.S. President, Mr. Bill Clinton, during a television interview, in which he described the Kashmir issue as the most dangerous but did not refer to the hijacking, caused widespread dismay. There seemed no justification for this lopsidedness (unless the interview had been recorded some time ago). In any case, New Delhi should be prepared for increased pressure for resolving what the U.S. and others of its way of thinking regard as the underlying cause of tension between India and Pakistan.
