
CHENNAI, JAN. 1. God, how he hated those tinted glasses! Or, were they thick, dark sheets of sun-control film on the glass that had hidden his sporting God, the object of his worship, from him?
Whatever it was, as the gleaming, new state-of-the-art Mercedes Benz braked at the traffic lights less than half a kilometre from the Nungambakkam Tennis Stadium, Surya Kumar's plaintive cries and frantic waving of a mangled placard made no impression on the passengers of the Merc as red turned to green and the driver stepped on the pedal.
``Oh, no. I didn't even get to see him. I dreamed about it for so many years and I couldn't even set my eyes on him,'' lamented Kumar.
HE, of course, was Boris Becker. And Kumar was one of many young men who couldn't find their way through the turnstiles at the stadium on the unforgettable evening that the German icon was defeated in a second round match of the 1998 Gold Flake Open.
As a sporting occasion, this city, which perhaps has more discerning sportslovers per square km than most others in India, has never before seen anything quite like That Evening.
The emotional scenes witnessed in and outside the stadium on that day cannot be compared to anything else that has happened in Chennai vis a vis a sportsman or a single sports event.
The ones that witnessed the extraordinary drama of that evening will only have to press memory's rewind button to hear those endless chants all over again: ``Boris, Boris, Boris!''
No doubt Indians are emotional people who celebrate their sporting heroes passionately. But not even a Sunil Gavaskar or a Sachin Tendulkar might have experienced the sort of reception that Becker got in April 1998.
The scenes at the stadium had to be seen to be believed. It was almost as if a huge throng of faithful men, women and children were worshipping the leader of a religious cult.
When the German megastar first appeared on the court - not to play, but to merely watch a match - chants of ``Boris, Boris'' could be heard a few streets away. The scenes were so deeply emotional that a German TV station flew in a crew in 24 hours' time to cover Becker's second round match.
What is more, when Becker lost to Gerard Solves of France, grown men and women wept and hundreds waited outside the main gates to catch a glimpse of the departing hero. Surely, as a sporting love affair, the Becker-Chennai liaison was one of its kind and the melodrama of That Evening was the high point of the brief rendezvous.
Quite apart from the quality of tennis that successive Gold Flake Open tournaments have put on show, That Evening was a crowning moment in the history of the event. For, it once again underlined the fact that sport is all about people.
Take away the people, and sport is not a spectacle anymore, merely a contest between two individuals or teams. Put the people back in, and sport becomes a fantastic, glorious, passion-filled activity that elevates us all.
And, what Chennai has done to the ATP Tour event in India is exactly this - it has put the people back into the equation to produce a heady concoction.
While the Becker phenomenon may not have a parallel in the context of the tournament, there is no disputing the fact that the Gold Flake Open has become one of the most popular international sporting events in this country.
The annual tennis show has, in fact, become such a hit that quite soon the organisers might have to think of persuading the Sports Development Authority of Tamil Nadu to try and expand the seating capacity of the stadium.
And that, to put it mildly, is a giant leap indeed. On the eve of the first edition of the Gold Flake Open, I distinctly remember a conversation I had with Brian Cooney, the Tournament Director. Cooney was so worried about the stands not filling up that he discussed ways and means of getting people to come and watch the tennis.
To be sure, Cooney was no pessimist who was ever ready to hit the panic button. For, only the previous year in the McDowell's ATP Tour event in New Delhi, there were two spectators in the stands to witness the first match of the tournament - one was the man who coached one of the players involved in the match and the other was a sports journalist!
In the event, what has transpired over the last three years represents a marvellous transformation for India's biggest tennis show, to put it mildly. And, no matter all the on-court heroics that a string of top players, Richard Krajicek down to Patrick Rafter and Carlos Moya, might have produced, the single most important reason for the success of the event is the involvement of the Chennai tennis fan.
Krajicek's cannonball serves, Mikhail Tillstrom's fluent strokeplay, Becker's hugely charismatic stage presence, Carlos Moya's love affair with this city which has prompted him to come back this year...the fans have had a lot coming their way over the years.
And, for the kind of passion with which they have supported the Gold Flake Open, who can say they don't deserve all that they've got...all that they can look forward to in the first year of the new millennium?
The only thing to hope for right now, on the first day of the new year, is that a genuine lover of the game and its heroes such as Surya Kumar - who never got to set his eyes on Boris Becker - will be able to find his way into the stadium next week.
***
Black gets down to business
CHENNAI, JAN. 1. Byron Black of Zimbabwe, the Gold Flake Open defending champion, got down to business shortly after his arrival on Saturday at the Nungambakkam tennis stadium.
Black, who hit with his coach Gavin Siney, however seemed rather unexcited about the tournament's change of dates. The Zimbabwean, it seems, would much rather play in this city in the heat and humidity of April.``It's cool now but I like the warmer weather,'' said Black.
Meanwhile, Rado, the renowned Swiss watch brand, has announced that it is the official watch for the tournament - January 3 to 9 - for the fourth year running.
