
CHENNAI, JAN. 4.
After six years of wrangling over its efficacy, the four-lane traffic system on Annai Salai might go.
With pressure mounting from various road safety groups and motorists, the City Traffic Police are contemplating scrapping the system. The proposal comes at a time when the Government is considering extending it till Halda junction at Guindy.
Source said the change of mind resulted from the spate of accidents on the four-lane stretch, especially when vehicles switch lanes, slow pace of movement of vehicles and wastage of road-space.
Traffic police has sent a proposal along with a CMDA study, which establishes the inefficiency, of the system to the Government for action.
The rationale behind the move, as explained by official sources quoting a study, is that the service lane was not adequate to handle the increased flow of traffic and there was a total chaos when cinema shows got over. Vehicles crawled at a speed of five to seven kms.
In contrast, during non-peak hours, the service lane was absolutely unused. It was also true about the carriage way earmarked for buses. For most part of the day, the carriage way remained empty while vehicles piled up on the car lane.
The planners are of the view that the proposed extension of the four-lane system upto Halda junction, at a total cost of about Rs. 52 crores, will only worsen the situation.
Indiscipline among motorists and poor enforcement is stated to be one of the other reasons for the poor functioning of the system. However, police take shelter in the argument that though the proportion of trips made by pedestrians, cyclists and two- wheelers was on the increase, the four-lane system put them at a disadvantage.
``The extension of the four-lane system is not feasible as there is no space for providing four lanes on either side of the road along many stretches. The stretches from Thiru Vi Ka junction to Anna Flyover, on the Anna flyover, from Anna Flyover to Eldams Road junction, LR Swamy building junction and upto CIT Nagar 1st main road junction are examples'', says a planner.
The phenomenal growth of the number of vehicles in the city from 6.41 lakhs when the four-lane system was introduced in 1993 to a staggering 10.78 lakhs now has altered the traffic pattern on Anna Salai. Those recommending the scrapping of the system claim that in practice the four-lane system only exists between Spencer point to General Patters Road on one side and upto Thiru Vi Ka Road on the opposite side.
Nowhere in the world, buses are given priority at the cost of other road users, a study by the CMDA on the four-lane system, some time ago, pointed out. It was suggested that priority clearance of buses at intersections along the Anna Salai was more cost effective than extension of the four-lane system.
The uneven distribution of vehicles and a rapid rise of two- wheelers has also prompted the traffic planners to revamp the system. With no value of time being assigned for slow moving vehicles, the speed of 33 km envisaged for cyclists was beyond the riding speed of cyclists, says the CMDA study.
Grade separators at all intersections to ensure smoother traffic flow has also been mooted. Other alternative concepts include clearance of buses on a priority basis at intersections.
The ``diamond boxes'' at different points along the four-lane stretch are highly prone to accidents, points out the study. The length of the boxes provided at different points do not take into account the acceleration and deceleration of the different modes for effecting a smooth change of lane by vehicles, the study pointed out.
