
CHENNAI, JAN. 3. There is nothing unusual about tied results in chess championships. But when the Progressive Tie-break system fails to resolve the tie, it is unusual. When Surya Sekhar Ganguly and Sundararajan Kidambi were deadlocked even in tie- break, Ganguly wanted the coin to be tossed to decide the champion of the 29th National junior chess championship at Sivakasi on Sunday. In 1991 he had won both the National under-10 and under-12 championships by the spin of a coin.
However, the AICF directive came from Calicut that the tie-break system followed in the World championships at Groningen 1998 and Las Vegas 1999 should be followed here. The first set of 15- minute tie-break games ended 1-1, both players winning with the white pieces. In the second set with 5 minutes per player, Ganguly won the first game with white and drew the second with black to emerge champion.
At 17, Ganguly is a veteran international player. He won the bronze twice in the World under-10 in 1991 at Warsaw and again in 1993 at Bratislava. In 1995 he took the silver in the World under-12 at Brazil. He has also represented the country in other international events.
In 1998 he got an IM norm from the First Saturday tournaments at Budapest. The IM norm has so far eluded him three times by just half a point. The year 1999 had been very successful for him. He won the strong National `B' championship in Mumbai. And, at Sivakasi he had bested the defending champion Kidambi, though narrowly in tie-break.
Ganguly learnt the game from his maternal grandfather Anil Basumallick. He is a 11th standard commerce student at Scottish Church Collegiate School in Calcutta. With marks over 75 per cent he could have got admission in science, but since it would affect his chess career he chose commerce.
Previously Abhijit Mazumdar was his coach. Now he studies chess by himself at Goodricke National Chess Academy which is situated in Gorky Sadan, Calcutta.
Surya Sekhar Ganguly with the N.P.S.S. Rathina Nadar Trophy he won edging out Sundararajan Kidambi (left) in the tie-break in the 29th National junior chess championship at Sivakasi on Sunday.
