
SYDNEY, JAN 2.Glenn McGrath is learnt to have got away with a mere caution for his misconduct after getting Sachin Tendulkar leg-before on the opening day of the third Test at the SCG here on Sunday.
Nothing could have driven home the point more than this judgement by Match Referee, Mr. Ranjan Madugalle, who had fined Venkatesh Prasad 35 per cent of his match fee in the last Test at Melbourne, that there are different yardsticks for different people even if the degree of the offence might have been the same.
Even as he won the appeal, McGrath, who had been slammed all over the park by a belligerent Tendulkar in that over, thundered down the track and made the batsman aware of his feelings. A clear case of sledging and bringing the game into disrepute.
Tendulkar ignored the ill-tempered bowler but that the Match Referee too opted to adopt a similar approach would hardly amuse the Indians who have been at the receiving end in this series, particularly from the Australian umpires.
Even though it was Zimbabwean umpire, Mr. Ian Robinson who handed the Indian skipper a decision which was debatable all the way, there was no doubt that the Match Referee too had an equal role to perform in giving the home players an impression that they could get away with anything on the field.
Prasad was fined because it was his third offence of the year. McGrath was no different. He had been spoken to after his cap- snatching incident at Adelaide from umpire Mr. Steve Dunne after he had rightly called a ``wide'', a fact which McGrath did not relish and kept mouthing unprintable stuff. You need not have to be an expert lip reader to know what McGrath had to say to Mr. Dunne. There was nothing pleasant about it.
It was a pity that the Australian bowler got away with just a caution for his disgusting act against a batsman who was walking away most gracefully despite receiving a horrendous decision.
At least on this occasion Mr. Madugalle, a polite and very pleasant person, deemed it fit to talk to the concerned offender. He had shockingly let Ricky Ponting go scot free when he had said a few things to Javagal Srinath after being hit on the visor at Melbourne.
The Indians have been receiving sentences most unjustified from the time the concept of match referee was introduced. Fined for excessive appealing, fined for charging at the umpire, fined for looking at the umpire were some of the reasons why some Indian players were penalised.
It may not yet dawn on the cricketing fraternity that two teams, Australia and South Africa, have been spared the fines and humiliation by a bunch of incompetent umpires the world over. The Match Referee is supposed to act only on the basis of an umpire reporting a player but what if he happens to see the offence himself on the television or otherwise. One understands it is not binding on the Match Referee to take action if the umpire does not report.
The Indians might feel aggrieved at the light penalty that NcGrath got away with it but then that is how things have been. There is no consistency in how some of the umpires and match referees look at things. The Glenn McGrath incidents in this series, not to forget the Ponting episode, are a telling proof of the glaring lack of justice by the so-called neutral officials.
