
CHENNAI, JAN. 3. We see some who, in spite of their criminal actions, do not suffer the consequences nor do they experience unhappiness. On the other hand, pious men, who may not think of even hurting anyone, are immersed in misery. On this score, can we attribute cruelty to God? The Vedas and the Upanishads say that God is not biased in giving joy or grief but He provides results according to our deeds. By having performed meritorious acts, a person gets noble birth and by his wicked acts, he is born as a sinner.
Sri Pramukh Swami Maharaj, in a discourse, said that a man who indulges in evil acts daringly, may seem to be happy at present but eventually he will have to face the consequences. What he does will surely fetch him punishment. In the society, we see those who do not follow moral or religious laws going scot-free but they will surely face the results later. While righteousness will fetch rewards, unruly acts will not go unpunished. Some who have amassed wealth by unethical means may be enjoying comforts. But when officials come to know about the sources of their income, they will be caught. On the other hand, those who believe in doing good only, will lead a life of joy and peace. An analogy is the grains stored in a bulk container. Good stock will be received through the outlet at the bottom. But if the container is filled with bad products, after those at the lower level are exhausted, the grains on the upper layer will flow. Thus, the evil designs are bound to be known at some stage and one who harbour them will suffer.
Once, Lord Swaminarayan was in an assembly when a woman devotee arrived and she was asked to be seated. Others were not so enthusiastic about this as she hailed from the so-called low caste. But the Swami explained that in her previous birth, she was from a high caste about which she was proud and arrogant and she showed aversion to other devotees who were not as lucky as she was. Now in this birth God had given her this status for her past attitude and actions. But the power, guidance and grace of a Godman will dissolve the effects of the past misdeeds. God or His messengers can intervene in deserving cases and save such penitents from excruciating pain caused by impalement, replacing it by a mere prick of a thorn. God is the ultimate authority.
Thus it should not be misconstrued that God is without compassion or He is vengeful when He makes one suffer. He is merely dispensing justice according to the Law of Action and Reaction. Whatever He does is for the good of the individual.
