
CHENNAI, JAN. 2. Tony Mottram was a tired man by the time he arrived in this city. Give or take a few minutes, it had taken a full day - 24 hours, that is - to fly in from London to what was then Madras.
It is another thing that the British No. 1 shook off the airplane-lag - there were no jets those days - in time and went on to beat a 14-year-old schoolboy, a pudgy teenager by the name of Ramanathan Krishnan who would go on to become the finest tennis player this country has produced, in the final of the South India championship.
Of course, there was no prize money in tennis then. If Mr. Mottram was lucky enough to have received any sort of appearance money, it might have been just about enough to take back home a few souvenirs from India, perhaps even a small Kashmiri carpet.
Now, let's fast forward 47 years, for the above description relates to an event that dates back to January 1952.
On Saturday, a Citation 10 aircraft touched down at the Anna international airport in Chennai shortly after 9 p.m. For once, there was not much fuss at the Customs desks where frenzied activity and chaos are the norm each time an international flight lands.
This time, the formalities were completed in quick time, for there were only six people stepping out of the Citation 10 - and three of them were crew members. Of the three listed passengers, tennis lovers would readily recognise one name - Yevgeny Kafelnikov, the top seed at the Gold Flake Open beginning here on Monday and 1999 Australian Open champion.
Kafelnikov, ranked No. 2 at the end of last year and a man who boasts of career earnings running pretty close to the $ 15 million mark, spent New Year's eve with his family in the German resort town of Baden-Baden.
From there, he was in no great hurry to leave on Saturday morning. After all, there was no check-in deadline, no worries about seat allotment on the flight. The pilot would do exactly what Kafelnikov wanted him to, take of exactly when his employer wanted him to.
For, the owner of the Citation 10 is Yevgeny Kafelnikov. And, even as it landed in Chennai on Saturday, it symbolised more than anything else professional tennis's flight into the new millennium.
Forty-seven years ago, Mr. Mottram would have hardly imagined that, by the turn of the millennium, top tennis players would be able to jet in and out of cities in their own private aircraft. Indeed, the game, and its top practitioners, have come a long way in the last few decades of the 20th century.
But, then, before we get carried away by the glitz and glory of modern tennis starring the likes of Kafelnikov, Cedric Pioline and Carlos Moya, the top three players in this year's Gold Flake Open, let's get one thing straight.
The unassuming visitors of the 1950s and 1960s, from Mottram down to Jack Arkinstall, Barry MacKay, Neale Fraser and Roy Emerson, might not have made tens of millions from the game but as skilled competitors they were as good - if not better - than the Kafelnikovs and the Moyas.
That's the wonderful thing about sport, really - this common thread running through generations and cutting across all barriers of time. And this common thread is represented by a player's enjoyment in competing and providing entertainment to the fans.
Take away the commercial mask of the game, forget about the mega- bucks and about all the hype too that surrounds most things sport...and when you scratch the surface, you know it is still very, very simple - it's about men competing against each other on a public stage and striving for excellence.
In the event, a Kafelnikov flying in on his own Citation 10 is no different from a Tony Mottram. And the Gold Flake Open itself is no different from a South India championship of another era featuring such giants as Fraser, Krishnan and Co.
After all, when you knock off all the superficialities, a tennis tournament is a tennis tournament. And the fans at the Egmore stadium, lured in by the sublime skills of a Krishnan or the power-play of a Fraser, were, in my opinion, certainly not any less fortunate than the ones that will fill the seats here at the state-of-the-art Nungambakkam stadium next week.
After all, when all is said and done, a tennis tournament is about tennis. And this point was driven home wonderfully by the man who won the Gold Flake Open two years ago.
On a Wednesday evening, after winning his first round match, Patrick Rafter - named the sexiest athlete in sport that year - one of the true megastars of the game, found himself in a strange situation. He could sense that the crowd was impatient and wanted him to leave the court as quickly as he could. The reason was simple: next due on court was a man called Boris Becker.
A few minutes later, as he removed his sweat-soaked shirt in the dressing room, I asked him how it felt to be in such a situation, about not being the centre of attention, about being almost ignored by the fans.
``Mate, Boris has been a great player. He deserves what he is getting (the attention). I don't care. I am here to play tennis, I am here to win,'' Rafter said.
Four days later, Rafter lifted the trophy that mattered and took home $ 58,000. It marked a comeback of sorts for him. That, then, is the bottom line. And the 32 players who'll line up in the main draw will each have only one thing in mind - play to the best of his ability.
And if men like Kafelnikov, Pioline, Moya and Byron Black do that, then the tennis fans of this city can look forward to some sort of millennium magic during the week. It's a pity that the Russian teenager Marat Safin had to pull out because of an injury. But despite his absence, the tournament features a very strong field with the resurfaced courts and the benevolent January weather providing greater comfort to players than in the last three years.
When you are ranked No. 2 in the world, you seldom have to worry about such mundane things as draw and seedings in a $ 400,000 tournament. As such, it would hardly be of great value to Kafelnikov to have found out on Sunday that he would play Michal Tabara of the Czech Republic in the first round.
Leander motivated
On the other hand, such things do matter to someone like Leander Paes, who promised himself late last year that he would regain his focus on singles play in the new millennium. Back to back Challenger victories at home before Christmas saw India's top player improve to 145 and he will take on Julien Boutter of France, ranked eight places above him, in the first round.
Should Paes win his first match, he might very well find himself face to face with Pioline, the No. 2 seed, in the second round. For the fans, that will be an occasion.
The young man Paes has been practising with here this week, the 16-year old National hardcourt champion Sunil Kumar, into the main draw on a wild card, has drawn a resurgent Ronald Agenor of Chile, a man who was first ranked by the ATP computer a year before Sunil Kumar was born. A 16-year old versus a 35-year old - that's something to look forward to.
Meanwhile, both Pioline and Black will play qualifiers in the first round while Carlos Moya might have a job on his hands when he takes on Oleg Ogorodov of Uzbekistan, a man who is rather used to Indian conditions.
The following are the tournament's top eight seeds in singles: 1. Yevgeny Kafelnikov (2); 2. Cedric Pioline (14); 3. Carlos Moya (22); 4. Jerome Golmard (38); 5. Byron Black (67); 6. Laurence Tieleman (89); 7. Roland Agenor (94); 8. Andreas Vinciguerra (99).
