
New Delhi, Jan. 3. (PTI): What does the new millennium hold for India? According to former Union Minister Y K Alagh, India is likely to face severe challenges in agriculture and sustainable use of land and water in this century.
Provision of drinking water, housing at reasonable costs besides health and education facilities will be another challenge that has travelled alongwith us in the 21st Century, says Dr Alagh noting that city planners, scientists, technologists and engineers are going to be seized of these problems for the next few decades to come.
The way to achieve the goals is to effectively apply research to development and exploit it commercially, suggests Prof Yashpal, former chairman of the University Grants Commission. Notwithstanding enormous research in many areas, it has yet to be harnessed properly by industry, says Yashpal ruing that the mindset of the industry has not changed, such that ``we have come to a stage where there's not a shade of appreciation of the difference between bringing in technology and creating technology.
``Everyone talks of development in space, nuclear energy programmes, defence research and the like, but these developed because the industry demanded from the researchers, says the academic advocating that it's time research from the labs is used for the benefit of the common man.
A point not lost to others: ``the adjustment of technology to the life of an average Indian -- the farmer as also the artisan is going to be the question,'' says Alagh.
``Technologies that are suited to indigenous needs and services and innovative methods and products, have to be nurtured and domestic technology development has to be selectively strengthened to be globally competitive in a mission mode,'' he says.
'Combine research and education'
Yashpal further suggests that education and research in science should be now combined so as to connect teaching with laboratories. ``Unless we put real research in universities and expose even youngsters to research then only new and fresh ideas will come about.''
India has a manpower pool of 30 lakh scientific workers to which 2 lakhs are added every year. Its R and D expenditure at 1.5 per cent of GDP compares well with other nations. The country has several hundred R&D institutions, universities and industries -- 384 supported by the Union Government, 713 by State Governments, 196 universities apart from private sector units not fully measured.
``The question really is if these can be readjusted to the needs of the 21st century,'' asks Alagh.
While he is optimistic that India has demonstrated skills both in mission-oriented research and more flexible research systems and their applications, Agriculturist Dr M S Swaminathan says ``there appears to be a discontinuity in the policy thrust that was visible in the early 70's during the days of the green revolution.''
An optimism shared by academics Dr Harbans Mukhia and Prof. Imtiaz Ahmed of the Jawaharlal Nehru University: ``India has a great future despite the constraining and restricting norms; an unleashing of energies of people is taking place.... Governance will also have to improve,'' says Mukhia.
Ahmed of the School of Political Sciences views poverty as the biggest problem confronting us this century. Personally he feels that issues like communalism and regional conflicts will die out because mass mobilisations will be stronger, and that will force Governments to act. ``Democracy will take deeper roots and state will be called on address the question of poverty.
``Governance in the next 25 years will have to be in response to people's demands,'' says the professor confident that polity is going to proceed along the lines of good governance because ``extremes don't pay in our society.''
Prof. Indiresan says he is hopeful that a new generation will come up and politicians will change... ``They'll have to.'' But according to Dr Kurien while there is role for the Government, there is also a role for the individual and group effort in building an India of which we can all be proud.
