
SYDNEY, JAN. 3. No sawdust even if the fielder needs it. Umpire Darrell Hair sternly told Sachin Tendulkar that no such facility could be provided when the Indians requested for sawdust in the second session of the ongoing Test against Australia.
Tendulkar maintained the spot was soggy. He said ``it was soggy. I checked twice. M.S.K. (Prasad) was not getting enough grip to move around. I requested the umpire. He said no. I asked him for a reason. Is there anything in the laws. It (sawdust) was not going to stop the ball. They (umpires) discussed and said no.''
Tendulkar said in the morning it was not needed because Prasad was standing further back since the ball was new. ``When the ball becomes older the wicketkeeper naturally comes up,'' he pleaded.
Then there was the incident of boots being thrown at Venkatesh Prasad near the boundary.
Tendulkar brought it to the notice of Mr. Ian Robinson, who reported exclaimed ``I know they are throwing boots.''
No action was taken, the Indian skipper said. He added ``the umpire is the final authority. We may or may not report, but that happens only at the end of the game.''
Kapil Dev chipped in ``there was nothing wrong in it. It wasn't going to harm the game. It was not delaying the game.'' - Our Special Correspondent
Langer's lively encounter
SYDNEY, JAN 3. If you thought cricket was serious business, just listen to what Justin Langer had to say about his conversation with Javagal Srinath during the course of his century.
Lucky to survive a few leg-before appeals and bowled off a no- ball, Langer returned undefeated and had revealed ``He (Srinath) said I would not be in his first 11 and then told me I must go and buy a lottery ticket today,'' said a smiling Langer, who continued ``I told him I have taken half of the luck from him. It was a sort of banter, it was fun. There was nothing serious in it.
``He bowled his heart out and he is a very good Test match bowler. He puts in all every time and I can understand what he must be feeling. I would be feeling the same if I was in his place.''
The left-hander maintained that he had heard the no- ball call early. ``I can't believe it. It was the same at the Oval last year against Alex Tudor. I needed some luck at the SCG. It has been a kind of nightmare for me. I really needed some luck to stay out there in the middle. But someone then up there was looking after me.
``Between 0 and 47, I batted the worst I have ever in any grade of cricket. Between 47 and 150, I hit the best I have this summer. And then in the end, it was new ball and probably the worst again I have played in my life.''
The modest Langer spoke of how his talk with Australia's hurdles champion Pat Farmer put him on the right path.``He was inspirational yesterday. He told me to always picture the finishing line. I took it away from him and kept thinking it would be great to get a hundred today. That was my finishing line.''
- Our Special Correspondent
