
WASHINGTON, JAN. 3. The Co Chairman of the Congressional caucus on India and Indian Americans, Mr. Gary Ackerman has lauded the Vajpayee administration for securing the release of the hostages and urged the Clinton administration to work with New Delhi to ensure that the hijackers were brought to justice swiftly.
In a statement, Mr. Ackerman also called on the State Department to conduct a speedy and time-bound review of the various violent Kashmiri outfits operating out of Pakistan and Afghanistan.
The lawmaker from New York said that he was gratified that the hijacking was resolved with no additional loss of life. Offering his sympathies to the family of Rupin Katyal, he said,``This murder and the whole act hijacking,is unacceptable to the civilised world and the perpetrators of this double infamy must not be allowed to escape the clutches of law''.
Mr. Ackerman, who is also the Democratic member of the House International Relations Committee, has argued that the hijacking of the Indian Airlines plane was yet another reminder of the threat that international terrorism poses to the civilised democracies.``I strongly urge the administration to give India all the support we can in pursuing the hijackers and holding them accountable to international law. They must be accountable. They must be caught. And they must be punished for their crimes. The civilised world should settle for nothing less'', Mr. Ackerman has said.
Mr. Ackerman has further made the point that the United States should work with India and other democracy-loving nations ``to not only redouble our cooperation to combat international terrorism,but find effective ways to inflict severe retribution on nations or societies that encourage and nurture terrorists in their midst'',and that the Clinton administration must give India relevant and time-sensitive intelligence data to bring about swift punishment to the killers of Rupin Katyal.
He called upon the State Department to conduct a speedy and time- bound review of the various violent terrorist outfits operating out of Pakistan and Afghanistan, as also the the role of the Pakistani military junta and the ``illegal Taliban regime'' in supporting these terrorist outfits.
``Upon this review I call upon the administration to designate these outfits and states as supporters of terrorism and be blacklisted. It is time the U.S. sent a clear message that this administration will not tolerate terrorism of any variety or hue in any part of the world'', Mr. Ackerman said.
Arguing that any military or terrorist action to change the status quo in Jammu and Kashmir was unacceptable to the international community, he said the ``core'' issue is not Kashmir. ``Instead,the core issue is the hegemonistic hopes of certain sections of the Pakistani national security apparatus that by either covert or overt actions, or a combination thereof, India can be successfully dismembered. It is this central aspiration that fuels all violence in Jammu and Kashmir. The latest incident of hijacking is nothing but yet another manifestation of this miscalculation'', Mr. Ackerman pointed out. ``The Kashmir issue can never be resolved by military means. It can only be resolved by mutual dialogue between India and Pakistan within the Framework of the Shimla Accord of 1972. The issue has to be resolved bilaterally, by the parties themselves'',he said.
