
THOUGH the sort of hijacking that is currently in the news is, fortunately, very rare, large scale hijackings have been a common feature of Indian political life since at least 1969; the year that Indira Gandhi hijacked us all by holding to our heads the "Garibi hatao" slogan. It is true that poverty certainly did merit serious attention then, as indeed it does even today. It is also true that, contrary to what the cynics suppose, Mrs. Gandhi did not seek to build up her personal popularity on the basis of rhetoric alone. Huge resources were in fact channeled by her towards the poor, specially since her return to power in 1980. The question which arises, then, is: if the job needed doing, and she in fact did it, how can it be called a hijack? After all, it is not as if Mrs. Gandhi perpetrated any fraud on the public in the name of the poor. Unlike Mr. V. P. Singh's Rs. 10,000 crore write off of the debts of "poor" farmers, Mrs. Gandhi's programmes did, by and large, reach the people for whom they were ostensibly intended. Nevertheless, the fact is that, thanks to the rash or adventurous or hasty way in which she went about the job, the whole operation cost us very much more than it need have done. Or, to put it another way, very much more could have been done to further the goal of poverty alleviation, even without inflicting such crippling costs on us. Thirty years later the public sector banks are still paying for her sins.
Some people will object that Indian politics had already been hijacked long before Mrs. Gandhi's time; they will say that though Partition is often said to have been made along communal lines, India in fact remained secular even afterwards. This, according to them, was the original sin. And it is to correct this that they now propose to hijack us once again. Not only to "correct" the wrong that they say was done to us at the time of Partition, but also to correct the wrongs that were done to us over centuries of Muslim and Christian rule. I cannot argue the point here, but I would like to raise one question: who is to undo the wrongs that we now propose to do in the name of correcting earlier wrongs? For, make no mistake about it, if the hardliners in the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) are allowed to have their way, many decades will be wasted; and thousands of lives lost. Muslim lives, yes, but Hindu lives as well.
What makes me even more sad is that the "softliners" in the BJP are in fact no less rash or adventurous than the hardliners. No doubt they have shown themselves to be more mature in their attitude towards the issues that are being raised by the Hindutva camp. But, then, it is also true that, right from the very day that Mr. Vajpayee came to power in 1998, they have been seeking to hijack us into an enormous escalation in defence expenditure that they imagine is going to lead us to world fame. India has enough problems at home, including Kashmir. It is these problems that we need to keep ourselves firmly focussed on, instead of resorting to adventurous programmes of action to "alter the course of history"; either in the future, or with respect to the past.
SUDHANSHU RANADE
