
PUNE, JAN. 3. The Prime Minister, Mr. A. B. Vajpayee, today assured that the Government was committed to removing bureaucratic hurdles to ensure that the country's success in the field of information technology was replicated in all areas of science, technology and enterprise.
Inaugurating the 87th annual session of the Indian Science Congress being held here, he said the Government had already taken several steps in this regard and was poised to follow these up.
The appointment of Prof. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam as the Principal Scientific Adviser to the Government with Cabinet rank was a step in this direction, he said and the Government would like to further increase the involvement of other distinguished scientists for the accomplishment of well-targeted national tasks.
He welcomed ideas from scientists on how the country could create world-class facilities and conditions in India for world-class achievements. The Government has set itself a goal. It is ``to make the 21st century India's century - Ikkesvin Shatabdi, Bharat ki Shatabdi.''
Pointing out that this was the first major public function he was participating in after the dawn of the new century, he listed eight primary tasks before the country. These include improvement of standards in science education; increase in the collaboration among universities, the industry and R&D institutions, including those under the defence sector; hike in investment on R&D from the present 0.86 per cent of GDP to one per cent this year and two per cent over the next five years; and the creation of an atmosphere of innovation, adventure, high ambition and achievement in every field of science.
The other measures for which he wanted priority attention are: strengthening of S&T institutions through competent and inspiring leadership; steps to bring considerable wealth of traditional knowledge in to the mainstream of the national S&T establishment; efforts to spread of the culture of venture capital and other forms of support for new knowledge-driven enterprises; and facilities to ensure that the country reaped benefit from the new intellectual property rights regime.
The Union Minister for Science and Technology, Prof. Murli Manohar Joshi, in his address, announced that the Technology Development Board under his Ministry has proposed to partner with the Unit Trust of India in floating An India Technology Venture Fund, and that the Government would provide an enabling environment if the corporate sector wanted to run programmes on the lines of the recently established foundation for the promotion of grassroot innovations to encourage, promote, document, and disseminate innovations in rural areas.
He also announced that the Government has selected five scientists for the National Bioscience Awards instituted recently for the development of the careers of young scientists. They are: Dr. B. N. Mallic of the JNU, Dr. Kanury V. S. Rao of the ICGEB, Dr. Dinakar M. Salunke of the National Institute of Immunology, Prof. Akhilesh Tyagi of the Delhi University's South Campus, and Dr. Umesh Varshney of the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore.
