
TIRUNELVELI, JAN. 2. The Janata Party has urged the State Government to speed up the corruption cases pending against the AIADMK chief, Ms. Jayalalitha, in the special courts by holding the trial on a daily basis.
A resolution adopted to this effect at the State executive committee meeting of the party held here today, pointed out that the Prevention of Corruption Act favoured speedy trial on a day- to-day basis. But unfortunately there was inordinate delay and even after three and a half years, there was no sign of any of the cases coming to an end. Ms. Jayalalitha was taking advantage of the loopholes in the legal process and prolonging the trial.
It was only after Ms. Chandralekha, president of the State unit of the party, presented a petition to the Chief Minister, pleading for steps for speeding up the cases, the Government wrote to the special courts for holding the trial daily. The meeting pleaded for close coordination between the Government and the judiciary for a speedy trial.
The party adopted a new document on its agriculture policy and made a plea to the Government to declare agriculture as an industry and to extend all the concessions being extended to the industry to the agriculture sector. All steps should be taken for modernisation of agricultural activities to make it compatible with the new World Trade Organisation guidelines.
The Government should create a Rs. 1,000 crore fund exclusively for crop insurance. The nationalised banks should be directed to reserve 25 per cent of the loans earmarked to the agriculture sector. This sector had a potential of exporting agricultural produce to the tune of Rs. 60,000 crores. Hence, the Government should set up airports even in small towns, create packaging, cold storage and other facilities with immediate effect. There was a lot of scope for augmenting the exports of farm products, thanks to the new GATT.
The meeting pointed out that creation of proper water sources alone would help the farmers augment their revenue. At present, only 30 per cent of the land area possessed irrigation facility.
Another resolution pointed out that on a public interest litigation filed by Dr. Subramanian Swamy, pleading for raising the height of the Periar Dam to 152 ft. from the present 136 ft., the Supreme Court had given a direction to the Kerala Government to take steps to solve the issue and give its reply by February 12.
Ms. Chandralekha presided over the meeting. Dr. Swamy and Mr. Jaishankar, president of the Kerala State unit of the party, attended the meeting.
