
The key pieces of the hijack puzzle can be traced to Nepal where a global network of terrorists, smugglers and underworld goons appears to have been galvanised under the watchful eye of Pakistan, reports ATUL ANEJA.
IN THE calm of a foggy winter night, at the visitors' lounge of the capital's international airport people with misty eyes could be spotted. Looking in a direction unknown, they quickly bury their faces in their palms hiding their tears. These relatives of the passengers aboard the hijacked Indian Airlines plane could not believe that their seven-day tryst with misery was nearing its end.
The television had shown their close ones being released at the Kandahar Airport. A few more minutes and this hijacking would soon become a part of history. Looking back, the past week had been an unforgettable ordeal for these relatives who continuously groped in the dark for information. And all they got in return was ``official'' consolation.
With all efforts to extract information about the release of hostages, whether through persuasion or street protests, having failed these distraught men and women clung on to the last resort of every human - hope.
However, the panic stirred by the killing of Rippan Katyal in the first couple of days was replaced by a new-found determination among the relatives towards the end of the 150-hour-long wait.
Initially, the relatives lashed out against the Government at the Airport as well as in the Government briefings. They stormed the press conference of the External Affairs Minister, Mr. Jaswant Singh, on Monday and even protested in front of the Prime Minister's residence for two days in a row. A relative, Ms. Asha Sharma, even offered her bangles to ``Vajpayeeji and Advaniji'' for their ``incompetence'' in securing the release of the hostages.
As the hours of wait increased, the resolve among the relatives to force details out of the Government also grew. Such was the fury that it seemed the Government would be compelled to take some drastic step under pressure from these agitating relatives.
Monday evening, however, was the turning point. Deputed by the Prime Minister, the Minister of State at the PMO, Ms. Vasundhara Raje Scindia, asked these relatives to gather at her residence in Scindia Villa but denied permission to the media. The first meeting was attended by a section of relatives only but from Tuesday onwards most of them went to the villa for daily briefings.
Though nothing exclusive was revealed at these meetings, relatives came to believe that their outpourings before the media could prove counter-productive. The increase in the demands of the militants also confirmed to them that the hijacking was an extension of Kargil.
``I now realise that this is not just a misery of my family but a calamity that has befallen the whole country. Whether the Government is doing the right thing or not, I feel, we should all stand united behind them,'' said Mr. Sri Ram Mago who had 16 relatives and friends on the plane.
All the resentment against the Government for an improper public information system and against Airport and Airlines authorities for not allowing them to meet the 26 released passengers was put behind them. From Tuesday onwards, an oft repeated line among the relatives was: ``Let us forget the past and look ahead.''
Relatives began to even avoid the media. Especially after the misinformed television flash on Tuesday that the hostages had been released. They controlled their emotions in public and did their crying in private. Preferring to remain indoors, faith in the Almighty became their main source of strength.
With an end to the hijack, the foggy window cleared - Mr. R. Kalidas wiped the last tears from his eyes to wear his spectacles. He had to collect the special pass to receive his son, Mr. K. Kannan, returning from Kandahar.
