
JERUSALEM, JAN. 3. Seeking to reassure a public wary of handing over the Golan Heights, the Israeli Prime Minister, Mr. Ehud Barak has said that opening borders and diplomatic relations with Israel's long-time enemy Syria is the real key to peace.
Before flying to the U.S. to relaunch peace talks with Syria, Mr. Barak said he felt the ``burden of responsibility'' to achieve an agreement within the year. ``We don't need to wait for another millenium, another century, or even another 10 years to find a way to make peace with our neighbours,'' Mr. Barak told reporters on the tarmac yesterday.
Syria has demanded a full Israeli withdrawal from the Golan Heights, a strategic plateau captured in the 1967 West Asia war. Mr. Barak has implied, but not explicitly stated, his willingness to hand over almost all of the Golan and to dismantle Israeli settlements there in exchange for security and normalisation with Syria. Underscoring the importance of the negotiations to the U.S., the President, Mr. Bill Clinton will open the talks in Shepherdstown, west Virginia, later today.
The Israeli Foreign Minister, Mr. David Levy, en route to Shepherdstown, told Israel's army radio that his country would ask the Syrian President, Mr. Hafez Assad to join the talks to prove he is serious about peace. So far, protocol at the talks has been unbalanced - Mr. Barak has headed the Israeli team while the Syrian Foreign Minister, Mr. Farouk al-Sharaa heads the Syrian side.
Mr. Clinton, pressing for a land-for-peace deal, has made West Asia peace a top foreign policy goal for 2000. Mr. Barak has promised to bring any peace agreement to a vote in a national referendum.
- AP
Deal will be a keystone: Albright
AFP, Reuters report from Washington:
``It's a huge, historic opportunity,'' the U.S. Secretary of State, Ms. Madeleine Albright said yesterday, adding that a peace deal would represent a ``keystone'' following Israel's peace agreements with Egypt and Jordan and its ongoing negotiations with the Palestinians.
Ms. Albright will attend every day of the negotiations, while Mr. Clinton will shuttle between the White House and the west Virginia resort to weigh in whenever necessary. ``We are hopeful,'' Ms. Albright said on the NBC television network yesterday. ``This is a very big deal.'' But she cautioned: ``It will be a very difficult set of negotiations... There are so many fateful decisions involved.''
``I am prepared to roll up my sleeves and work with them and, more importantly, they are prepared to roll up their sleeves and work on the issues,'' Ms. Albright said. ``We have to be very realistic. We don't know how long it's going to take. ... We will assess where we are at the end of the week and we are just going to be keep working on it. It's too important not to give it our full attention,'' she added.
In the talks held here last year, Mr. Barak and Mr. Sharaa never negotiated without the presence of a U.S. official, usually Ms. Albright. U.S. officials hope that in Shepherdstown it will be possible for negotiations to occur without such U.S. support.
