
HYDERABAD, JAN. 3. The 11th round of the Janmabhoomi programme of self-help, which is conducted for a week once in three months, commenced today in the State with ``gram sabhas'', free medical checkups and collection of data for household multi-purpose cards by students of degree and post graduate courses.
This round was marked by the coming together of the entire Opposition - the Congress(I) joined hands with the CPI, the CPI(M) and the CPI(ML) - to oppose the Chief Minister, Mr. N. Chandrababu Naidu's ``pro-World Bank bias'' in planning. About a dozen student organisations, including the National Students Union of India (Congress-I), the Students Federation of India (CPI-M), the All-India Students Federation (CPI) and the Progress Democratic Students Union (CPI-ML), protested against the concept of the programme, alleging that the Government was harming the interests of unemployed youth by refusing to fill vacancies arising out of retirement from Government service. The CPI and CPI(M) gave a call to their cadre to question the authorities in the ``gram sabhas'' whether they had completed schemes taken up in the earlier rounds.
The boycott call by these organisations had only a small impact in some towns. In Cuddapah, the students prevented a dozen buses parked on the campus from leaving for the villages. In Hyderabad, about 20 student leaders, who raised slogans before the Secretariat, were arrested for defying prohibitory orders. There was tension on the campus of the Agricultural University in Rajendranagar after the death of a student in the hostel last night. The ambulance on the campus was not functional and the University authorities had not provided a vehicle to take him to hospital.
Mr. Naidu criticised the Congress(I) for ``instigating'' the students, asserting that it was the Telugu Desam Government that had recruited 80,000 teachers, 15,000 policemen and 8,000 doctors. He recalled that a writ petition filed by a Congress(I) leader two years ago, challenging the involvement of students in the Janmabhoomi programme, was dismissed by the High Court, and the Congress(I), therefore, could not oppose the involvement of students in the voluntary work.
Lot of preparations were made for the programme with focus on the ``micro plan'' that the one lakh students are expected to prepare this week. A team of two students, headed by a University lecturer functioning as a ``resource person'' will prepare the plan for every ``habitation'' with over 200 population. There is an apprehension that the Government would eliminate bogus ration cards because the multi-purpose household survey would reveal the assets of the family and the size of its land holding, apart from the names of children who do not go to school. It would be easy to identify families that have more than an annual income of Rs. 11,000, which makes them ineligible to have family cards. The Government, however, has asserted that this was not the purpose of the survey.
The State Government is spending about Rs. 50 every day for each student towards food expenses. The Congress(I) had promised to abolish the programme during its election campaign last year, alleging that funds were being misused to benefit TDP functionaries.
Though it is less than two months since the general elections, the entire Opposition has come together to challenge Mr. Naidu on the programme, a unity that was absent during the election campaign. The two Communist Parties suffered a major setback, with their strength having declined from 34 to two in Assembly. The CPI is cut up because it is not being invited to all party meetings since it has no presence in the Assembly.
It is clear that this atmosphere of confrontation will intensify in the coming months.
