
CHENNAI, JAN. 4. For the gleaming, new Citation 10 aircraft it was a smooth landing last Saturday evening at the Anna international airport. But, for its multi-millionaire owner, it was a crash landing on a stage where he was put on a pedestal all his own.
Yevgeny Kafelnikov's game never really took off as the world No. 2 and top seed crashed out in shocking fashion in the first round of the Gold Flake Open, losing 4-6, 2-6 to a 20-year old Czech called Michal Tabara whose career prize money ($ 133,238) will not be enough to buy a one per cent share in the Citation 10 owned by his famous opponent.
If Kafelnikov's game never got airborne - and there was the lurking suspicion that he wasn't too displeased about it - then his problems may not have ended there, on the court. If he was hoping to take off from this city itself, he may have run into a problem or two at Meenambakkam. For his aircraft did not have the clearance for a Tuesday take-off. In the event, it is just as well he is staying back to play doubles with Martin Damm.
Kafelnikov's loss came on an evening when Carlos Moya pulled out because of an injury and the defending champion Byron Black and the sixth seeded Laurence Tieleman were beaten in the first round. With Marat Safin withdrawing on the eve of the tournament, the event now has as many charismatic stars in singles as you can count on one finger - the name, of course, is Leander Paes.
Meanwhile, if Paes believes that it takes all the running he can do to stay in the same place as far as his singles game goes, then he cannot really be faulted.
In this era of specialisation in sport, where doubles play seems to be a game within a game with its own star-cast, trying to do well in both singles and doubles is a lot like attempting to have the cake and eat it too.
No matter that, India's No.1 player has been doing the juggling act with tremendous courage over the last few years. But, during a year when he and Mahesh Bhupathi created history by playing all four Grand Slam doubles finals and winning two of them, Paes's singles ranking predictably nose-dived.
And, one of Paes's millennium resolutions is to try and become the best singles player he can be in the year 2000. Towards that end, what the heroic Davis Cup performer did on Tuesday was no more than take a small first step.
Leander advances
Still a touch rusty after the brief holiday season, Paes put together the stuff he needed against the French beanpole Julien Boutter for a 6-4, 7-6(6) first round victory.
That is just as well. In a tournament where the stars are falling off like mosquitoes in the face of fumes from a can of Hit, Paes's survival on the big stage is critical.
What is more, not long after Moya's withdrawal, the defending champion Byron Black of Zimbabwe, playing like a man who left half - the good half, that is - his game back home in Harare, was beaten 6-2, 7-6 (4) by Jaime Delgado of Britain.
lOther results: First round: Jiri Vacek (Cze) bt Yaoki Ishii (Japan) 6-3, 6-4; Andreas Vinciguerra (Swe) bt Alex Lopez-Moron (Spain) 6-4, 6-2; Markus Hantschk (Ger) bt Laurence Tieleman 7- 6(2), 6-3.
lMonday's results: Singles: Tomas Behrend (Ger) bt Alexander Popp (Ger) 6-4, 4-6, 6-1.
Doubles (first round): Leander Paes and Byron Black bt Sander Groen and Laurence Tielemen 6-3, 7-6; J. Jayne and A. Palmer bt Sunil Kumar and Akshay Vishal Rao 6-2, 6-0; Bohdan Ulirach and J. Vacek bt Ivan Smolensky and Oril Santoytchev 6-3, 3-1 (retd).
