
CHENNAI, JAN. 3. No, he may not have the aura of a Boris Becker nor the glamour associated with a Carlos Moya. But Yevgeny Kafelnikov is different.
Ranked No. 2 in the ATP year end list, the lanky Russian, winner of two Grand Slam tournaments, is immensely conscious of his stature, proud that he is one of the best players in the world, eager to retain that position right there at the top and in the process keep aloft his country's flag.
That iron will in him is reflected when he says that his goal always has been to ``win as many matches and tournaments'' as possible. And behind that fierce competitive spirit is his patriotic bent when he said, ``winning the gold medal for my country at the Sydney Olympics and taking Russia to a Davis Cup triumph'' are his primary objectives in the new millennium.
That is Kafelnikov. A different individual, who wasted no time after landing in the city to keep sharpening himself for the rigors ahead starting with his first tourney here. ``You have to give your 100 per cent for every match,'' is his thinking.
Observers say he is an aggressive player and he proved he can be just as forthright in facing media at his first meeting on Monday. Incidentally he had just returned from another hard work out.
What must have amazed many was his candid appraisal of himself. ``I am a complete player now and I do not see any room for improvement. I am also physically strong and my body is ready for loads of work,'' he said as he went on to explain why the stiff schedule around the globe does not lessen his energy level nor jade him. Basically it had to do with the ``desire to do well,'' he said on the key to success. ``I have never had a role model, not really but I have come up the hard way. When I won my first tournament, I said to myself I could win more,'' Kafelnikov said of his early days. ``Now young children in my country see me play and try to come up,'' he said while admitting that it was not always easy. ``I had the advantage of coming from a sports family and always being encouraged to do the best,'' he said.
The big career strides however have not clouded his outlook. That streak of modesty is there when he talked about his illustrious contemporaries in particular Pete Sampras, whom he calls ``a player of huge talent and game and very difficult to compete against.'' He was equally forthright on his countrymate Marat Safin, who should have been here but withdrew because of injuries. ``He is young, talented but it remains to be seen if he can work with dedication and undergo sacrifices,'' he said.
Kafelnikov now concentrates more on singles because ``I have established myself well.'' Earlier, as he put it, he took part in doubles to improve his singles play. While on the subject, he had some good words for Paes and Bhupathi. ``They are good both on the court and off it,'' he said, adding that doubles play calls for lot of understanding and coordination and that was what made the Indian duo something different.
For one so confident, does fear of failure scare him ? ``Yes, when I start losing in early rounds. But I know I can get over it easily,'' Kafelnikov said and the smile was unmistakable. For the moment his sights are on a tournament win here to start the millennium on a perfect note. He needs to, for his country too, so fiercely patriotic is he. The resignation of President Boris Yeltsin shocked him, he revealed, because the President liked him personally and the country's sportspersons, for Yeltsin believed it was the sportspersons who kept the country in the news always.
