
CHENNAI, JAN. 3. Md. Kaif of Uttar Pradesh has been named captain of the India under-19 team for the junior World Cup to be played in Sri Lanka between January 11 and 28. India is grouped with New Zealand, Bangladesh and Holland and plays Bangladesh in the opener on January 12.
The junior National selection committee, comprising Messrs. Rajinder Goel (chairman, North), Mahindra Rajdev (West), Sashikant Khandkar (Central), S. Kangralkar (South) and Ashish Sinha (East), met at the Chidambaram Stadium on Monday. Also present at the meeting, convened by TNCA Secretary Mr. Ashok Kumbhat, were coach Roger Binny and Mr. K.M. Ram Prasad, KSCA President and BCCI Vice President.
Speaking to the press, Roger Binny said that the team is experienced with most of them playing Ranji Trophy and a couple in the Duleep Trophy. ``They are match-fit, having just competed in the Cooch Behar and the Col. C.K. Nayudu tournaments.''
Mr. Rajinder Goel said the squad was picked with emphasis on allround abilities. From the present squad, Kaif, who toured the West Indies with the India `A' team recently, and vice-captain Reetinder Singh Sodhi played in the last World Cup in South Africa, which was won by England.
Ravneet Ricky and Arjun Yadav, who were added to the probables list two days ago after their fine performances in the C.K. Nayudu Trophy, find themselves in.
Binny said that left-arm spinner Rakesh Dhruv, wicketkeeper Pallav Vora, batsmen Prashant Joshi, Gautam Gambhir, Sushant Manjrekar, R.R. Das and leg-spinner C.M. Shyam were discussed in detail. The team leaves for Colombo on January 6.
lThe groupings: Group `A': England, Zimbabwe, West Indies and Americas. `B': New Zealand, India, Bangladesh and Holland. `C': South Africa, Pakistan, Kenya and Nepal. `D': Australia, Sri Lanka, Ireland and Namibia.
lThe team: Md. Kaif (captain, U.P.), Reetinder Singh Sodhi (vice- captain, Punjab), Yuveraj Singh (Punjab), Y. Venugopala Rao (Andhra), Niraj Patel (Gujarat), Shalabh Srivastava (U.P.), Mritunjay Tripathi (U.P.), Ajay Ratra (wk, Haryana), Arjun Yadav (Hyderabad), Ravneet Ricky (Punjab), Vidyut Sivaramakrishnan (T.N.), Mihir Diwakar (Bihar), Anup Dave (Rajasthan) and Manish Sharma (Punjab). Coach: Roger Binny. Manager: Dr. G. Nandakumar (Joint Secretary, TNCA).
