
CHENNAI, JAN. 3. A growing confrontation between the management and employees is threatening to undermine the ideals of the Kalakshetra Foundation. The annual dance-drama festival held in the last week of December every year has been the first casualty. It has been postponed.
However, members of the Foundation are optimistic of sorting out the issue and may hold the programme in February/March 2000 to coincide with the birth anniversary of the founder, Rukmini Devi.
According to artistes from the college of fine arts, the core areas of concern are the anomalies in pay scale and the lack of a comprehensive pension scheme. Admitting to these problems, representatives from the Foundation emphasise that the employees wanted ``a written assurance that they will get Central Government pay scales and retirement benefits''. Unless that was done, they would not participate in any performance was the ultimatum, which explained the need to reschedule the festival. The employees claimed that plans for the festival were dropped immediately after they asked the management to consider their demands.
However, the Foundation clarified that the need for a pension scheme had been communicated to Government of India. Employees are now required to retire at 60 years of age. One musician who retired a few years ago is receiving only Rs. 271 a month, ``which is grossly inadequate''.
Disappointed by the management's attitude, members of the faculty say they do not have the advantage of leave travel and housing allowances and no scope for medical reimbursement either. Licence fees are being collected towards house rent, members point out.
The Foundation, which was established by an Act of Parliament (in 1993), had no authority to increase pay to Central Government levels, say sources. During the changeover, salaries were raised to correspond with State Government scales. However, the artistes contend that the increase was arbitrary and fixed at the discretion of the management.
One group of staff says that the best way out of the tangle was to give deemed university status to the Foundation. Subsequently the problems might sort themselves out, they feel. Representatives claim that only teachers with degrees can then be accommodated in the new set-up. Many have grown up with the institution and have only their skill to show and no certificate to prove their proficiency.
It is also pointed out that the four-year diploma course offered here is not recognised by most aided-universities. There has been a drop in students as at least three institutions (Bharatiyar Palkalai Koodam, Pondicherry; Kalaikaveri, Tiruchi; Music College, Tiruvaiyur) offer the same discipline as per UGC guidelines.
The management insists that by not cooperating, the faculty members were digging their own grave. In the existing system, 20 per cent of the expenditure is to be met by the Foundation by holding performances. The remaining amount is met by the Central Government.
Failing to get any favourable response from the management, faculty members formed the Kalakshetra Foundation Staff Welfare Association which is yet to be recognised (by the management). Staff members want all communication to be sent to the Association, while the management refuses to acknowledge its existence, resulting in a stalemate in negotiations.
With no positive action from both parties, faculty members have taken the matter to court for a settlement. And the management says its hands are tied now.
