
CHOMOLUNGMA SINGS THE BLUES - Travels round Everest:Ed Douglas; Srishti Publishers and Distributors, 64-A, Adhchini, Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi-110017. Rs. 175.
UNLIKE MOST of the literature on Everest expeditions, the book under review presents features normally ignored by writers on the subject. Their enthusiasm begins and ends with graphic narrations of the arduous climb leading to the actual assault on the summit. The name ``Chomolungma'' is of Sherpa origin, and the author has used the original native name of the Everest for the title of this volume and, likewise, he has chosen as the main subject- matter the people of Tibet and Nepal, with emphasis on their life and living conditions, not forgetting their substantial contributions to various trekking adventures in the Himalayas. His aim is to show that ``the summit was not the end of the story, for it was not right that a nation of 20 millions, wearied by social problems and with long and important links to my own country, was reduced in the national consciousness to the exploits of a few mountaineers.'' The forced occupation of Tibet by China, hundreds of thousands killed, religion suppressed, and the Dalai Lama sent away from his spiritual and temporal seat, are mentioned vividly; travellers to Everest region would not have missed observing the prevailing state. But, China, despite its hegemony, cleverly lured tourists, ``dangling romantic conditions of old Tibet to let them spend their currency in the new Chinese territory''.
The enticing charm of Everest continues to this day, in spite of dreadful casualties since the days of the first victim, Alexander Kellas in 1921. Statistics reveal that as many as 726 people have climbed the peak until 1997, with some having repeated the ascent. More than 150 are known to have died during this period. It is, therefore, that the rush of mountaineers to Everest and the consequent growth of commercial opportunities have caused much concern and confusion about the future of mountaineering. It has now shaped into a ``trekking industry'' where specialist organisations and agencies are offering ``package deals'', supplying all the paraphernalia for the climbing, including safety equipment, oxygen bottles, and Sherpa guides. The writer has expressed surprise that ``a peak which is purely a geological phenomenon'', and could vanish in a few million years into the waters as happened to Atlantis, should attract several persons from all over the world to undertake the risky trip, merely to satisfy an ego, and to state ``I was there''.
We read with much anguish about the resulting cultural impact on the simple Sherpa communities, who had migrated from Tibet, settling down in Kumbhu. Fortune had not favoured them and only a few saw a thin streak of prosperity if they had an inherent ability to trade. Indeed, ``tourism filled the gap in trade left by the sudden closure of the old trading routes consequent on the Chinese occupation of Tibet. Today these Sherpas try to strike bargains with ``old surplus expedition equipments, everything from camping gas and chocolates to novels and ice axes.'' It appears, Tenzing Norgay stated that ``Sherpas do not cling, like people with olden cultures, to ancient traditions, but adapt themselves to new thoughts and habits.'' Yet, this does not mean discarding the things they had got right. Family ties and bonds, and respect for the elders are some typical features that knit Sherpas into a homogeneous community, although they were ready to salvage detritus from western mountaineering expeditions in order to provide for themselves modern conveniences.
It is a sad commentary on the attitude of the representatives of the advanced countries, who have spoilt the fair face of the mountain, the areas around the base camps, and over the route to the top of the world. To the Sherpas, ``Chomolungma'' is ``Goddess mother of wind'', and to the Nepalese, it is ``Sagarmatha'' (brow of the ocean), and polluting this place amounts to sacrilege! It is, therefore, shocking to learn about the pile-up of garbage amidst the grand ice-clad mountain slopes. The issue of garbage has thus reached alarming proportions, causing world-wide attention for devising ways to clean it. Organisations like the SPCC (Sagarmatha Pollution Control Committee) and many other private agencies have taken up the task of solving the garbage crisis and to educate trekking and local people on keeping the environment free from further pollution.
In the massive operation, American initiatives, led by Brent Bishop and Bob McConnell, were a significant beginning. Their straight- forward approach by paying Sherpas on expeditions to bring back discarded items was a very practical proposition. Using the bonus scheme, Bishop even managed to make inroads into the mess left behind at the South Col through 45 years of expeditions.
The hospitality experienced in the homes of these unsophisticated hill folks is clearly brought out by the writer, citing examples of western visitors who had camped in lodges run by them. Unlimited courses of the local drink, tea, and specialities of potato-based dishes were greatly relished by the trekkers. A typical family scene in the house of Dachchini Sherpa, who was the author's friend and guide throughout, is presented with genuine appreciation. But yet, amidst all the glare and publicity associated with each completed expedition to the Everest by rich Westerners, there is little mention about the role of the locals or the Sherpas who had made it possible; even pictures of the adventurous climb ``carry a shadowy figure, a smiling Sherpa from among many, liked but rarely known.'' An interesting diversion in the book takes us away from the grim tension-laden mountaineering narration to ``Yeti'', the abominable snowman; the nocturnal visits of the mythical creature causing damage and destruction where it trod, and imperceptibly leaving the scene, only add to the mystery surrounding this semi-human being, parading the Himalayas.
The author has really called for honest thinking by the trekkers of the West, particularly, for realising that ``there is a cultural and religious stake in the landscape around Everest,'' and also that they have a moral obligation to elevate the impoverished local inhabitants.
A. V. SWAMINATHAN
