
PUNE, JAN. 4. The much awaited indigenously built light combat aircraft (LCA) would be finally test flown by the end of this month, according to Dr. A. P. J. Abdul Kalam, Principal Scientific Adviser to the Government. He was giving a lecture as part of the 87th session of the Indian Science Congress here.
Considered the world's smallest fighter aircraft, the plane is designed to meet the needs of the Indian Air Force in carrying out low altitude warfare training. The LCA has been in the making for the past one decade. The project is being implemented by Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) and Aeronautical Development Agency under the Defence Research and Development Organisation.
Dr. Kalam said the Trishul, Nag and Akash missile systems were expected to be operationalised within the next one to two years. These would be besides Agni and Prithvi, which were already in operation. Dr. Kalam, who was till recently Scientific Adviser to the Defence Minister, said work on an indigenous unmanned supersonic fighter plane was proceeding apace and the plane would be ready within five to 10 years. The vehicle would combine critical technologies such as satellite, missile and aircraft technology, he said and added that it would be able to neutralise nuclear attacks.
The defence scientist referred to the problems posed by technology denials and control regimes imposed by Western countries, and said there was a need for an union of Asian countries under India's leadership to fight the cause together.
Dr. K. Kasturirangan, Chairman, Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO), in his lecture titled, ``Indian strategic technologies in the 21st century,'' said Indian space scientists had recently developed a geo-synchronous satellite launch vehicle (GSLV) that could carry a six- tonne payload into the lunar orbit. The vehicle, which would be needed for ISRO's proposed lunar expedition, would be tested soon, he added.
Dr. R. Chidambaram, Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission, said there was a proposal to set up two 1,000 MW light water reactors in Tamil Nadu shortly in collaboration with Russia and a 500 MW pressurised heavy water reactor at Tarapur in Maharashtra.
