
SYDNEY, DEC. 31. The Brett Lee phenomenen is likely to break Australia's short-lived two-spinner tradition at the Sydney Cricket Ground when the third and final Test against India begins on Sunday.
The joy of his rapid rise has put on hold, at least temporarily, the excitement surrounding Shane Warne needing only five wickets to overtake Dennis Lillee's record 355.
Lee has made such a huge impact during his Test debut in Melbourne this week that the state of the pitch is unlikely to be a serious consideration in the make-up of the team.
Even though off-spinner Colin Miller has been included in a squad of 13, the closest he is expected to come to the centre of the SCG is carrying the drinks, with Michael Kasprowicz left out altogether.
After all, given India's love of spinners and uncertainty against pace, who would the Aussies rather play against - a spinner who has hardly managed a first class match this season or the fastest bowler in the country after a seven- wicket debut which included breaking the thumb of opening batman Sadagopan Ramesh?
It is not a difficult question. Lee has other things in his favour. Recent wet weather and an uncertain forecast would enhance the possibility of a seaming pitch and make it less likely to break up for the spinners.
More significantly, Lee is from New South Wales and knows how to bowl in the local conditions. It is the same pedigree which has made Glenn McGrath such a smart fast bowler, if there is such a thing.
As the wicket begins to break up it not only aids spinners, but tends to offer inconsistent bounce. If fast bowlers can push a batsman onto the back foot they have an ever- increasing chance of a shooter providing a leg before wicket or bowled.
The coarse nature of the pitch also tends to tear the new ball up, giving it a shelf life of only 15 to 20 overs. Even though he loves bowling with the new ball, Lee finds its rapid deterioration more of a bonus than a blow.
``You can start bowling reverse swing from 20 to 25 overs at the SCG, where it takes up to 50 overs in other places,'' Lee said. ``The Irish (reverse swinging) ball is very, very lethal. It's just as lethal as the brand new ball.''
Anything bowled properly at Lee's pace is lethal. He was consistently up around the 150 kmph mark in Melbourne. At that rate he will be the fastest bowler in the world very soon if he is not already.
It is his ability as an enforcer which Steve Waugh is keen to encourage. He has wasted no time, giving the second new ball of India's second innings to Lee ahead of McGrath, who has 268 wickets.
``Steve said just bowl as fast as you can. Steam in and have some fun. Enjoy it and lap it up,'' Lee revealed on Friday. ``I felt so proud when he threw me the new ball. It was a very big honor and I didn't want to let him down.''
The Indians will be unhappy to know that Lee will probably only get faster once he steps out in front of his home crowd, given the reception he received at the MCG.
``The crowd in Melbourne was fantastic. It's the biggest crowd I've played in front of. Until then the biggest was about 5000 people. To hear the crowd clapping when you come onto bowl just pumps you up. It gives you a couple of yards in pace.''
