
THE HIJACKING of the Indian Airlines' aircraft to Afghanistan is a major success for international terrorism. International attention would no doubt focus on the methods adopted in this hijack and even more on the steps each state must take in the light of this experience. India would also need to improve its technical and systemic shortcomings shown up by this event. The more important issue, however, is about the real meaning of the incident.
The hijack is on one hand the result of a small group pulling off a major terrorist success. On the other hand, it is demonstrative of a major nation state, with all its military capabilities, looking helpless in the eyes of its people and the world. That is what terrorism is all about. Terrorism applies violence against innocent citizens to obtain political ends. It gains political credibility by making the state look incompetent and incapable of protecting its citizens. The Government is even now wasting time on trivialities. Repeated assertions that India is not a soft state, or, that the hijack is the handiwork of Pakistan, or, that the Taliban assisted the hijackers in escaping, does little to increase the Government's dented credibility. Pompous phrases by political leaders and inefficient administration combine to further damage the credibility of the state. That is exactly what the terrorist wants to happen.
The latest hijack was unique in many ways. It was masterminded in one country, put into action in another and taken to its successful conclusion in a third country. It made use of security inefficiency in Nepal and of a slow and tardy response by the Government of India. It was ended in Afghanistan, in the safety of the Taliban's protection. The Government of India could not use its capability of armed action against the hijackers. Its well-trained anti-hijack force, raised and maintained at great cost, was left stranded. Retaining control is the essence of crisis management. Once the aircraft was allowed to leave the airport at Amritsar, both control over the situation and the major advantage of a quick, armed response were lost. It could not, thereafter, mount an armed action to storm the aircraft and free the hostages, which could have been easily done on Indian soil. The Government was then left with the sole choice of coming to terms with the hijackers' demands.
The Government remained paralysed for about twelve hours after the hijack began. Apparently there was confusion on who was behind the hijack and what their demands were. Notwithstanding that, by a process of elimination a conclusion could have been reached on the main issue with which the hijack was linked, ie; Jammu and Kashmir. That would have allowed a faster decision on the bottom line which the Government was prepared to accept from the hijackers. This was essential since the armed response option was no longer a feasibility. Yet after the aircraft landed at Kandahar, there was no urgency to get in touch with the crew, the hijackers or the Taliban. Instead, time was wasted in contacting the Governments of other countries to seek their help. Even after one dead man was given out by the hijackers, things continued without urgency. When the U.N. was brought in by the Taliban, the Government at first almost disassociated itself from that initiative. A military option was being considered well after that option had been lost. The list of things that went wrong is long and is likely to get longer with time. The majority of the passengers in this hijacking were from or around Delhi. Their relatives acted in unison to ask some hard questions of the Government. They even forced an entry into the corridors of power to raise their voice. What would the situation have been if the passengers were from other and distant parts of India? Who would have taken up their cause? The meaning of this should be read carefully. There is a widespread sense in the public mind of double standards applied by the political leadership. The perception that there are different yardsticks for those in authority or with influence, and for the common citizen, is a warning about the gap now existing between the leaders and those they profess to lead.
In the cacophony of noises which were made about the well-being of the passengers, national interests were mentioned, both by the Government and its well-wishers. The argument was astounding in its assumption that the interests of the state are different from those of the citizens. It was argued by some that the lives of the passengers and the crew were dispensable in national interest. No one bothered to state which interest would have been served by the Indian state forsaking not only its citizens but those of other countries on board the aircraft belonging to India's national carrier! The juxtaposition of impossible choices for the state is the strategy of the terrorist. The speed and the confidence with which the political leadership makes the choice can to a great extent deny the psychological advantage to the terrorist. That is the sign of a responsible government. There was a moment in this episode when the Government came close to being seen as accountable to itself, rather than to its citizens. Sadly, the Government fell short of its people's expectations on this account.
The hijack and its aftermath can be far reaching in its ramifications. There is greater awareness of Indian vulnerabilities on account of terrorist activities. This will encourage more attempts at terrorist acts. The success of the hijack will bring more individuals fired by the jehadic spirit to the terrorist cause. Other elements within India with a sense of deprivation, and disgruntled with the state's apathy to their needs, will be encouraged by the success of terrorism. The security forces will be disheartened. Their leadership will have a job convincing the rank and file of the need to continue risking lives in fighting and apprehending terrorists. A continuing attempt to place the blame outside the Government will only highlight the gulf between political courage and that of the men in the security forces. It will not be an edifying experience.
As for Jammu & Kashmir, the inspiration for the hijack, the urgent need to improve governance in that State cannot be over- emphasised. It would suffice to cite just one indicator of the public perception of governance there. In the 1996 Assembly elections, nearly 50 per cent of the electorate risked life and limb to come out and vote. In the 1999 Parliament elections, the percentage was only a little over ten. That is the measure of the goodwill lost through misgovernance. The meaning is clear. Large packages of money pumped into the system cannot correct people's alienation, if the system does not care for the citizen. The warning should be clearer still. A political system which is unable to comprehend the relationship between the good of its citizens and that of the state, makes the job of the terrorist easier.
The hijack and its success, in the long run, is no more than a tactical setback to the Indian state. The war against terrorism will have to be continued and won. That war cannot, however, be won solely by the sword-arm of the state. A total reliance on security forces for keeping peace limits the state to merely keeping the level of terrorist activity down. A huge security apparatus cannot protect the state's interests indefinitely. Reliance solely on the security apparatus creates complacency amongst political leadership and bureaucracy, of the kind which led to failures in the hijack drama. Involving the people in governance is the need of the times ahead. That involves greater public accountability of the government apparatus. It needs building people's confidence in the political leadership's greater concern for the common man than for the privileged segments. A truer understanding of national interest, devoid of high-sounding phrases but rich in effective governance, will be the key to winning the war against terrorism.
(The writer is Director, Delhi Policy Group, and a former Director-General of Military Operations.)
