
Another Gandhi amidst the migrants
WHEN Gopalakrishna Gandhi, Secretary to the President of India, was recently honoured with an honorary doctorate of law by the University of Natal, this grandson of Gandhiji and Rajaji accepted the recognition on behalf of the Mahatma, Dada Abdullah Seth who had brought the young M. K. Gandhi to South Africa to appear in a law suit, and the generations of indentured Indian labour who had been brought to South Africa from November 16,1860.
Indian labour overseas is, however, more than a historical memory to Gopal Gandhi. In the several 'bio-briefs' written about him following the rare gesture made to one who had not too long ago served for a brief while as India's High Commissioner to South Africa, I've found no mention of his own connection with migrant Indian labour. That was a connection which developed while he was an IAS officer of the Tamil Nadu cadre. I'm not sure whether he's still a member of the service or not, but it was in that capacity that he was once seconded to the Indian Deputy High Commission in Kandy, in the central highlands of Sri Lanka, to help with the repatriation of Indian workers on the tea plantations of the Island who opted for, or were forced by local pressures into, returning to India, the land of their roots but about which they knew nothing.
Out of his experiences during those three years in Kandy there emerged a moving book, Sharanam, a novel he wrote for Affiliated East-West Press, Madras. This poignant story of the traumas of plantation life and migration that the 'Indian Tamils' of Ceylon faced had a rather unusual publishing history.
Books generally first appear in hard-cover versions and are then published as paperbacks. In the case of Sharanam, it was, uniquely, the other way about; AEW Madras published it as a paperback and a few years later it was brought out as a hardback by Ravi Dayal, Delhi. One of Ravi Dayal's first titles after he parted company with Oxford University Press as its All-India head in order to do something more than mere academic publishing, he gave Sharnam in its new edition a more English-friendly title, Refuge. A perceptive look at the sorry state of life in the Sri Lankan plantations, both editions deserved a wider readership than they got, as much for Gopalakrishna's elegant prose as for a theme India, particularly Tamil Nadu, has closed its eyes to over the last 150 years, I have always thought that there is scope for a serious film in the book, a film that could well prove a 'hit'. But that has remained only a fond hope.
* * *
Slow progress since EPOCH times
THE need to preserve and protect both man-made as well as natural heritage found place in the Madras urban development regulations as early as 1972, when the MMDA became functional. What was perhaps the country's first NGO for this purpose was also established around the same time. It's therefore sad to see that we have not progressed any further in the years since.
EPOCH, that NGO, a six-person Society for the Environment and Protection of Culture and Heritage, comprised Balasubramaniam, Vice-Chairman, MMDA, Dattatrey, Chief Town Planner, Prof. Raj of the School of Architecture, Nanditha Krishna, of the CPR Foundation, Abraham Eraly of Aside and this columnist. We struggled to create some interest in the subject, failed in our efforts to save Moore Market and Bentinck's Building, built for the Presidency's Supreme Court and later used as the Collectorate, and called it a day. INTACH Tamil Nadu, its successor, has fared a little better and not only survived a decade and more but has also been able to arouse some greater interest in heritage in the city.
Its latest effort to get the administration further interested in heritage was to organise with the CMDA recently a seminar to discuss "Heritage Conservation Regulations." I went to it fearing a discussion of legal nuances and the bandying about of such abbreviations as FIRs, FARs and TDRs. There was undoubtedly some of that, but I, who had gone to spend a morning, found myself there the full two days absorbed by the presentations of three people so committed to heritage preservation and protection that I can only describe them as the "Three Musketeers of Heritage Conservation." I have seldom been at a seminar where there was a greater degree of passion for and commitment to the subject.
* * *
Three musketeers of heritage
PROF. K. T. Ravindran has come a long way from his Madras School of Architecture days. Now HoD, Dept. of Urban Design, School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi, he is at present advising on the conservation of Fort Cochin and its "Indian town" Mattancherry. A member of the Urban Arts Commission of Delhi, he looks forward to the day when Madras will have a similar body to look at not only the effect of urbanisation on man-made and natural heritage but which will also rule on on-going development in the city. At the seminar, he took the quiet philosophic approach to conservation guidelines but all the more telling because of the pictures he showed and discussed.
Shyam Chainani, the Coke-swilling civil engineer from MIT who "couldn't get an engineering job" so made it to the Tata Administrative Service because of an MBA, was from the Bombay Environmental Action Group. It may be a Tata-supported organisation, "but it has not hesitated to take on the Tatas where necessary." Perhaps seminar sponsors Chennai Heritage will one day develop in this fashion and play the kind of role BEAG has played in getting the Mumbai Heritage Regulations into the books and implemented thereafter, but for now the Chennai Heritage representatives could only listen with awe to what crusading zeal has achieved in Mumbai. With conservationists and administrators working to a common goal, even politicians have begun to join the crusade there to preserve heritage. But that needed someone like Chainani and the BEAG willing to take on all stumbling blocks and the ugliest of elements. Chainani and the third musketeer, S. P. Shorey, played an important role in saving the DGP Building by attesting to its heritage value.
Shorey, Member Secretary, Hyderabad Urban Development Authority, was an unusual kind of crusader; being a bureaucrat made him that. That he has replicated much of what has happened in Mumbai, in Hyderabad, showed that even a bureaucrat can achieve results in a field like heritage provided he is committed as well as realistic. You'll lose some cases, but in time you'll win many more, and all it needs is a little give and take in negotiations to make people see the light, have been the foundations of his approach. It is an approach that's succeeded, I'm sure, as much because of his deprecatory sense of wry humour as his willingness to face reality. You might have to concede a multi-storey building to save a 300-year-old treasure provided you can 'negotiate' how the former is built, is the Shorey way.
Few seminars have thrown up speakers with such down-to-earth, practical advice. Will the CMDA accept this wisdom and take the next step urged by the trio: List the landmark heritage buildings and natural features of Chennai immediately and introduce as quickly as possible regulations similar to those in Mumbai, Delhi and Hyderabad, to encourage their conservation?
* * *
Weddings across boundaries
IT HAS been a season of weddings across boundaries and it has been delightful not only to see parents accepting their new sons and daughters from over the seas or other parts of the country but also the newcomers take to local customs as though to the manner born. I have never heard of so many such weddings in such a short span of time as I did in the first week or two of December.
The tall, slim and blonde Yugoslav girl made a lovely bride, wearing her red and gold saree and traditional South Indian jewellery with much greater aplomb than her bridegroom who appeared to have problems with his veshti. The Arya Samaj purohit Jayadev, who has proved such a delight at many a Madras wedding, kept soothing him with, "Plenty of time, go in and tie it right.... I'll wait, there's plenty of time...." And time, this part-time purohit and full-time businessman certainly always has, explaining every mantra, sloka and ritual in English to every couple he blesses, but fortunately he is so eloquent and so full of good humour, you do not feel the hour and more pass. Least of all the couple, who always have something to smile about when he addresses them.
Also from over the seas were three young Americans representing the American religious and racial spectrum marrying an equally wide spectrum of girls from Madras, a Sindhi, a Coorgi and a Tamil Brahmin. At one of these weddings, held in a temple, the American was perfectly at ease in a panchakacham-style veshti and joined happily in the oonjal-paattu. A highlight was a light- hearted English oonjal-paattu composed specially for the occasion; it certainly grabbed the attention of and brought smile to all when sung.
Closer home, crossing State borders were Syrian Christians and Tamil Brahmins, Tamils and Punjabs and Tamils and Sindhis among those I heard about. Undoubtedly there must have been other such marriages during this holiday season. With the world becoming a smaller place, this is undoubtedly the way the youth of today and tomorrow are going to go. It is going to be love, not arrangement.
It is time traditional society was a little more responsive to such marriages and shared the happiness of the parents and the children. May this be a step towards greater integration. And on that happy note, let me add "A Very Happy New Year" to all of you who read this column.
S. MUTHIAH
