
CHENNAI, JAN. 1. Every human being who desires to lead a regulated, virtuous, perfect and meaningful life should adhere to the code of ethics, follow traditional values and observe rules of discipline.
To the extent possible he should give charity to deserving causes, know his limitations before embarking on a venture, be careful in his utterances and realise with whom he is conversing and the situation in which he is placed.
All sacred texts give us the guidelines for shaping our conduct. One of them, Thirukkural, gifted to us centuries ago, epitomises the entire human aspiration, provides a wealth of practical wisdom, gives tips for leading a right life and a code of self- luminous existence.
Its author, Thiruvalluvar, says that a good deed that is done, not in return, is more precious than anything in the world or even beyond. By itself, the help rendered may be a trifle but the hour of the need when it is extended makes it bigger than the entire world. In the Ramayana, Sita was saved in time by Anjaneya, as otherwise she might have ended her life. Man is born as a social being and hence should function as a cooperator. He should not expect any return for the services done. The wealth he accumulates should be used for the needy.
The poet compares this gesture to that of a tank (that is filled by rain) in the middle of a village, and to those of trees like neem, mango and plantain, some of their products used for medicinal purposes. There is no price too high to pay for being of service to society.
Before drawing any plan, man should assess his own capacity, his limitations, his resources and the strength of his competitors. Over-vaulting ambition is sure to perish. Out of his weakness, Yudhishtirar did not stop the game of dice and he had to suffer.
Likewise, he should wait for the proper time to launch his scheme seeing how his adversary works. During the day, even a crow can conquer an owl and hence he should be cautious not to falter in the middle.
Sri M. K. Ramanan, in a lecture, said one can succeed in his attempt to establish himself if the right time and the right place are chosen. A person should understand that even the weak can win a challenge if he chooses the right place to assail the rival. For example, the crocodile, when out of water, can be an easy prey to its foes. An elephant, stuck up in mire, can be killed even by a jackal. It is also necessary for the wise to divine and discover the hidden thoughts of his opponents so as to gain control over them.
