
Individualism has been the hallmark of this century and expressions of individuality have often strayed into the eccentric. But the more you try to be different the chances are that you conform to some niche. As one millennium ends and the next opens up, it seems to be an age of conformity. But drop your worry. There is still a "you" somewhere, only it has gone underground, says LUC SANTE.
ARE you a unique individual? What a stupid question! How could you not be? You are the only person to have been born at 12:08:32 a.m. on June 17, 1973, in the maternity ward of Enos T. Throop Memorial Hospital in Picpus, N. Y. You are easily distinguishable from the infants born in the same location on the same day at 12:07 and 12:09, respectively - their parents were different from yours, for one thing, unless, of course, you are one of a set of twins or triplets. Even then, your fingerprints will be unique, and the graph of your voice print equally singular, identifiably yours alone, even when you talk in a growl or a falsetto. Anyway, the important thing is that you know that you are you, an inimitable human being, with a collection of tastes, tendencies, tropisms, penchants and small perversities that have never been gathered together in exactly the same way in the history of the world.
So how do you express this uniqueness of yours? Maybe you always and unfailingly wear red socks. Or you wear your watch on the pulse side of your wrist. Or you have a hummingbird tattooed just above your ankle. Or you carry special imported tea bags with you everywhere and will drink nothing else. Or you are never seen without your tiny, trembling dog. Or you have a cabochon emerald implanted in one of your front teeth. Or you drive a converted army ambulance. Or you write with a fountain pen the size of a celery stalk. Or you wear shorts even in winter. Or you wear a baseball cap even to church. Or you wear the same outfit every day. Or you rig your car with vanity plates that encode your nickname. Or you have everything monogrammed, down to your unmentionables.
These are hard times for individuality. If you practice any of the above small eccentricities, you've got to know that at least a zillion people do the same (and that includes the implanted stone in your tooth, which will, forever, appear, to the casual eye, like a forgotten piece of spinach). Even if you engage in some kind of radical piercing, like encasing both eyebrows in tight rows of small rings and, by this means, emphatically announce to the world that you are not employed in middle management at a Fortune 500 company, you are hardly doing something unprecedented. The fact that you have carried out such a thing virtually insures that you've taken notice of all other humans in your town or on your travels who have done the same. Perhaps, then, you are not proclaiming your individuality so much as establishing your kinship with others of the same micropersuasion.
The compulsion to express one's individuality by means of eccentric style was, for centuries, restricted to members of the aristocracy, the only people who had the means or the time to pay attention to style much less to feel constrained by prevalent fashions. Things changed in the 19th Century, with the rise of the bourgeoisie, which imposed a set of instant standards and latter-day traditions upon the general population. The first people to set themselves apart from these dictates were the earliest bohemians, specifically the Jeune France crowd in Paris circa 1830, which included Gerard de Nerval, today much better known to English speakers for having walked a lobster on a leash through the gardens of the Palais Royal than for his visionary poems. His friends drank wine from human skulls, assumed bizarre names, dyed or perfumed or sculptured their beards in strange shapes, slept in tents pitched on the floors of their garrets and so on. The connection between art and eccentricity was thus forged. Although when monolithic rules were in place, it wasn't hard to announce one's uniqueness and, as a bonus, get a rise from the enforcers of those rules. When all men wore black suits, and those suits necessarily had to be cut by tailors, it wasn't much more expensive to procure a bolt of broad cloth in, say, purple, and have a suit made that would cause passersby to stop in their tracks in horror, admiration or a hybrid of the two.
The U.S., meanwhile, has always had an equivocal attitude toward individualism. It has given the idea quite a bit of lip service over the years, in part as a wedge against collectivism and in part with respect to the prevalent notion that success stories are the hard-won results of solo efforts. The "rugged individual", who at least used to figure so often in political rhetoric, was generally someone who had built an empire with his bare hands, unless he was a mythic embodiment: the lone prospector, for example.Otherwise, people who looked, talked or acted funny were not often encouraged in their pursuits or invited to move in next door. They might serve as entertainment, but only at a distance. In the waning days of the universal dress code, the Beats were tabloid fixtures for more than a decade, a fascination based on their beards, leotards, berets and perceived reluctance to bathe. You might take a tour bus to go stare at the beatniks in their own habitat but if they showed up in your town, they would be swiftly escorted out again. Their appearance alone would have raised eyebrows, but their homosexuality, race mixing, marijuana and poverty definitely did not fit community standards.
In the following decade the hippies appeared and, quite apart from their even longer hair, sometimes wilder mores and more active politics, they were frightening because of their broad success. The Beats, were, after all, intellectuals, and so automatically limited in their reach but the hippies made only vague and easily consumable feints in that direction. The package of lifestyle accessories they promoted actually sold, big time. Less than a decade separated the time when having long hair could get one beaten up from the time when many of those who did the beating grew their own hair over their collars. Yet the allure of being part of a counterculture persisted, an outlaw thrill despite mounting evidence that the outlaws were mainstream. I think it was in the late winter of 1971 that I cut high school to go buy tickets to see the Allman Brothers in Passaic, N.J. As I stood shivering in the endless line for the box office it struck me that every single human being on the line was wearing blue jeans. Somehow I had previously failed to appreciate the inescapability of the phenomenon. As the sociologist Ned Polsky has pointed out, blue jeans, which had formerly been worn only by farmers and miners and cowboys, and then seldom off the job, were one of the beatniks' few lasting contributions to middle-class culture. Well before the end of Richard Nixon's first term, they had become a uniform.
Blue jeans had thus crossed several lines: from utility to style, from emblem of rebellion to marks of adherence and from in-group insignia to mass-culture requisite. As the tide of human affairs turned yet again during the Seventies, the alleged hipness of blue jeans (along with, to be sure, their comfort, ease and versatility) continued to work its charms upon those formerly young people who had perhaps smoked a little reefer in their school days but were now coming up in the world. Something more, however was needed, something that would distinguish their blue jeans from those of the panhandler, the yurt dweller, the Black Sabbath fan and, of course, the plumber. Thus was born the designer jean: the same product; perhaps a trifle more flatteringly cut, at many times the price and with a fancy label visible on the rear. This, in turn, set a pattern that has been repeated with various permutations many times over the past quarter century and that shows no signs of abating.
Youth styles are now assimilated so rapidly that there is no longer any lag time between their appearance on the street and the confection of upmarket versions. Ever since hip-hop, the last decisive style wave, intially clocked in 20 years ago, everything has pretty much been present all at once. If you are young and run with a set you will be aware of the shifting meanings of a shoe brand or a leg width - and woe betide you if you miss a ripple - but everybody else can blink twice, and the significance will have gone all the way around the cycle and come back to its starting point. The ferocious appetite of the market has met the constraints of gang signs, which have been forced to abandon the simple colour patterns or arrangements of shoelaces of yore and instead become so fleeting and subtle as to escape the notice of hostile outsiders.
Of course, everyone everywhere speaks in some sort of code - speaks, that is, a language that will be understood by a particular crowd that can include friends, colleagues, co- religionists, fellow hobbyists, members of one's club, cabal, social class, income bracket, sexual persuasion, political tendency, age cluster or any other sort of affinity group. The message being communicated is simple. "I am one of you." Your shoes say, "I am an architect"; your bumper sticker says, "I am a Deadhead"; your tie pin says, "I am a Royal Arch Mason"; your handbag says. "I make a great deal of money but don't flaunt it"; your eyeglasses say, "I am pretending to be European"; your earring says, "I still remember my misspent youth"; your sports utility vehicle says, "I believe everything I see on television." In other words, all your appurtenances are gang signs.
Such coded messages have long existed, particularly the ones relating to class, but they have lately been proliferating to the point where there are simply no alternatives, nothing that cannot be read in a minute by a large number of people. A degree of invisibility can be conferred by adopting the lowest common denominator, but singularity is something else. I thought that the theatricality of large public events had always been good for bringing the weirdos down from the hills, so I checked in at Woodstock '99. Although I hadn't made it to the original. I remembered how large outdoor concerts of that era and even a decade or more later had encouraged people to dress themselves up as Merlin or Little Bo Peep, to put together bizzare collages of stuff they found in the dump or the garage - in short, to make a spectacle of themselves if only for one day. Instead what I saw were baseball caps worn frontward or backward, golf hats in various degrees of floppiness, T-shirts, shorts, sneakers. Oh, and skin, the commonest of denominators. The only novelty of much significance came in the form of garish airbrush body paintings - not unlike the things you see on the sides of vans driven by dudes - that were administered in a midway tent that also provided tattoos and piercings. The paintings were striking, although it wasn't exactly as if the wearers had worked them out themselves. Almost everybody else, assuming they had packed shirts without slogans or illustrations, could have shown up at the pep rally or the church barbecue with just a few minor tweakings.
We seem to be living in an age of conformity, the chief difference from other such ages being that conformity has been decentralised. You can call it niche conformity. This is because of the Argus-like omnipresence of marketing in all aspects of life, also the generalised exhaustion and the sense that everything has already been done twice over, also the age-old factors of fear and loneliness. These days individuals no longer have recourse to outsider camps that can cosset and protect them while they behave as oddly as they wish. (Nor can they abandon Bohemia and go home again - in the past, there was always the fallback position. The dandy could probably go back to his Midwestern town, the beatnik to graduate school.)
Every group has become a focus group, which promotes adherence to a norm and aggressively markets any viable stylistic innovations so that they move from the street to the nation in about a minute. Most important, the margins of society are no longer an option but a sentence.
The trade-off used to mean exchanging mainstream comforts like new-model cars and steaks and colour televisions for a cold-water flat and meals of rice and beans and cheap Chianti. Now it is economically impossible to sacrifice comfort for freedom, not unless you can savour freedom while sleeping in doorways and shelters and holding tanks.
Right now, everything is for sale, including you, and if you are not saleable, you will starve. So you tailor and trim and adapt yourself. Sand down your edges, maximise your appeal. There is still a you there, but it has gone underground, meaning somewhere deep within.
(c) The New York Times Magazine
Luc Sante, a frequent contributor to The New York Times Magazine, is the author of "Low Life," "Evidence" and "The Factory of Facts."
