
CAPE TOWN, JAN. 3. The recent massacre of about 30 persons in the Tamera area in north- west Rwanda by suspected Hutu militants of the Interahamwe from across the border in the Democratic Republic of the Congo once again brings to the fore the fatal flaws in the Lusaka accord signed on August 31 that is supposed to have brought to end the hostilities in the DRC and the Great Lakes region.
The incident also raises the issue of the sustainability of the present Governments both in Rwanda and Burundi where the majority Hutu population has been virtually shut out of any meaningful role in the Government, following the complex political and military changes that took place in the 1990's, prior to and in the wake of the Rwandan genocide in April-May 1994 in which nearly a million Tutsis and moderate Hutus were killed.
Indeed, it also raises questions about the persistence of these identities and murderous initiatives arising out of them even though informed observers have consistently challenged what they maintain are falsely constructed ethnic identities under colonialism.
According to an agency report from Gisenyi, also in the same area in Rwanda and the scene of a much larger massacre in December 1997-January 1998, the specially built village inhabited by ``Tutsis of 1959'', that is, those Tutsis who had fled Rwanda before independence and had settled down in what was then another Belgian colony across the border, now the DRC, and had returned to Rwanda following the emergence of a Tutsi- dominated Government in the wake of the victory of the Rwandan Patriotic Front in July 1994, was attacked because its inhabitants were an exposed and isolated minority in an area overwhelmingly inhabited by the Hutus.
It was broadly in the same area across the border in the eastern DRC from where the attackers are believed to have come that tens of thousands of Hutu refugees from Rwanda, innocent civilians as well as those believed to have taken part in the massacres of April-May 1994 fled in the wake of the RPF victory and the emergence of a Tutsi-dominated Government in Kigali, to be accommodated in camps. These camps were seen by the new Government as hotbeds of intrigue and conspiracies against it; and were one of the factors that influenced the RPF Government to support, indeed actively intervene, in the war against the Mobutu regime by the forces led by Mr. Laurent Kabila.
One of the strategic objectives of Rwanda's intervention in the Zaire/DRC conflict is ``securing its borders'' with the DRC. This remains unchanged and continues to inform the current role of Rwanda in the conflict, this time in opposition to its erstwhile ally.
The incident also brings to the fore the fatal flaws in the Lusaka accord. Among other things, the accord specifically provided for the disarming of militias which were not signatories to the accord which was signed, apart from the principal belligerents (the DRC, Rwanda, Uganda, Angola, Namibia and Zimbabwe) by only three rebel factions. The accord indeed specifically mentions in this context the Interahamwe and the ex- FAR (former armed forces of Rwanda), describing these as ``negative forces'' in the conflict.
Given the historic experience, the apprehensions of the Tutsi minority-dominated Government in Kigali are understandable. However, these complex equations also raise questions about the sustainability of a regime which, of its nature, is supported by a minority population; and from which, because of its recent experience, the majority of the people in the country are excluded from playing any meaningful role.
Quite rightly, the genocide in Rwanda roused the ``international community'', though murkier details about the background to the stirring into action of the ``international community'' are now being officially acknowledged in self-serving accounts by U.N. bureaucrats and commissioned studies.
Quite rightly, too, the RPG regime, despite its minority character, is recognised and acknowledged as the legitimate Government of Rwanda.
However, incidents like the one in Tamera underline the fragility of such legitimacy insofar as the majority of the people of the country are concerned. This dilemma, of how to secure the support of the majority of its own citizens, many of whom either acquiesced or actively participated in the massacres of the (more resourceful) minority population, is yet to be resolved not merely in Rwanda but also in Burundi where too, in a sequence of events quite different from that in Rwanda, a similar anomaly exists.
