
THE EXCITEMENT continues. It is not just a New Year, it is a new century as well. We are on the information highway and science gallops at break-neck speed. Thinking machines and dot com have made life a lot more easy and fast-paced. And yet there are more frontiers to be explored in the new millennium.
Millennium is the buzz word today. But going beyond the millennium bashes and mega sales, we are confronted with myriad serious questions. What would 2000 AD be like? What are the expectations of the commoner and the connoisseur? What are the religious concerns of the morrow? What are the aspirations of the youth? What would be the future of technology....? Here is a medley of persons who think aloud about the future..
As the curtains come down on the 20th century, it is time to look back, introspect and re-assess the century that was and the future that will be. What does Dr. Prithika Chary, neurologist and neurosurgeon and Director Epicenter, Apollo Hospitals, have to say about the new millennium? "This New Year is no different from any other year, except that it happens to herald the start of a new millennium. The hype is a marketing concept picked up from the West. Yes, it is special because God has let us be a part of change - change from man power to machine power, from a mechanical age to a technical age, from consumerism to information technology and communication, from isolation to a global viewpoint in all that we do."
She looks forward to a future where "each of us does our bit - both on the personal and social front. We have realised that India also can be a world player in every field - beauty pageants, cricket, tennis, information technology, science and medicine. But the tragedy is that the talent available does not have the infrastructure or enough encouragement to sustain itself in this country - hence the 'brain drain'.
Most successful industries, including competitive sport, have taught the Indian value of developing the "winning formula", but we have sadly neglected the fact that these winners in the international arena need a nurturing environment in India, not just to survive, but to excel."
She continues, "I hope we are able to change our mindset and realise that being clever is not enough. We must also realise that while each of us is unique in his or her own way, we are a part of the whole. I hope we are able to rise above our pettiness, our politics and make India blaze its trail into the new millennium as one of the most powerful countries in the world."
The whizkid of Indian film music, A. R. Rahman, who has several interesting projects lined up for the coming year, in his usual style, puts the onus on the Almighty. He says, "For me, it is just like any other day. I will probably be working that day too. As far as the next year goes, all I can say is that I will continue doing my work, to the best of my ability. The rest is in the hands of God!"
For Dr. M. S. Swaminathan, Director, M. S. Swaminathan Research Foundation, "the new century will bring about widespread understanding of the value and beauty of diversity and pluralism within humankind in particular and in the biological world in general."
"Let me hope that the 21st Century will be characterised by freedom from hunger, gender equality, harmony with Nature and the eclipse of unsustainable lifestyles and unacceptable poverty. We have uncommon opportunities today for a more equitable and peaceful world, thanks to the onward march of science and spread of democratic systems of governance and free and independent media," he says.
Sujatha, the writer, begins on an optimistic note and ends on one too. He envisages technological advancements on an even larger scale, especially in his favourite line, computers. It is a very interesting viewpoint that he presents when he says, mechanisation and progressive technology can help eradicate not only poverty but the most persistent malady, corruption. "I am sure it can be done. Poverty can be done away with and corruption minimised to negligible levels with the help of computerisation... take our Railway booking system today."
What has begun in a big way in the Communication industry in this century will develop even further as we march into the next, feels he. A person living in a remote village can today create software for a firm in the US. And making our villagers self- sufficient and liveable would stop people from migrating to cities.
Our communication system may have its flaws but despite such factors, it is incredibly advancing. A significant example is our fax machine, explains Sujatha. According to him, computer courses should be made suitable for our way of life... sadly it is not so. "Computer Science taught here is outdated.'' So also our satellite system has opened the doors of the West even our simple village folk here and Western culture comes to them in a "distorted way" as Sujatha puts it. His suggestion is that in the new century that dawns our country can follow the "controlled content" pattern a la Singapore so that our people are not confused by this culture fusion.
Yet another major factor that has to be dealt with on a war footing is population explosion. Once these problems have been addressed Sujatha is convinced that India will become a major power... Isn't it too optimistic a view?
Why should it be...? We have the best available human resources, our knowledge of English is a boon and our strides in technology are strong enough to take us places". He is emphatic.
There is a lot of hope in our youth and a lot of potential, not only in computers but in so many other fields as well, opines Sujatha. "I see a lot of positive things for us in the millennium as far as plans go..... the only alarming or negating factor is the delay in the execution of each," says Sujatha with a smile.
Sumitra Sriram, a socially conscious person and a history teacher with the D.A.V Group of schools, voices opinions that are almost antithetical to Sujatha's. "Our planning has always been wrong and will probably continue to be so unless some drastic changes are brought in," she begins and says that 2000 will be the same as 1999 or the year before. Having more consumer durables and more brands to choose from does not in any way indicate development.
Sumitra's stand seems to be brimming with pessimism. "No... No..." she says "I am only being realistic."
Her fond hope is that the cultural invasion of the West would fade into oblivion at least in the new era and our youngsters would learn to value our culture and our heritage. "It is disheartening to note that our youngsters who have positive values and who are our future hope fly away to foreign lands..." Sumitra continues.
Her fervent hope is that our apathy towards fellow beings and our culture would give way to concern for others and pride in our predecessors.
Balu Sastrigal, a purohit and a small time film and television actor (an enigmatic combination!) agrees with Sumitra Sriram's views to a certain extent.
"Nobody seems to have time for others these days. People are too aterialistic. Concern for our elders is what I wish to see among our youngsters", says he.
As far as the year 2000 is concerned, according to the Shastras, it is expected to be a fruitful year -``a year that would bring fulfilment and joy to the world as a whole," he asserts.
The irrepressible Krish Srikkanth revealed a sentimental aspect of his happy-go-lucky perspective.
"The New Year Day of 2000 is no different for me. I only hope that Indian cricket grows in the next century. Notwithstanding the huge advances made in TV coverage and third umpire related decisions, I would hate to see the day the man in the middle is deprived of adjudging LBW or caught behind." This from the pioneer of slam bang batting against the new ball!
Filmstar Prabhu also got sentimental - "We should learn to appreciate our freedom fighters as they are responsible for the freedom we enjoy. I am fortunate to usher in the next century when my family headed by my father and mother will be present. I pray for good times for all the people connected with the film industry and all in general."
Scion of the Murugappa Group, Arun Alagappan, who shares an abiding passion for horses with Prabhu (they are often seen together at equestrian pursuits), had jointly organised the National Equestrian Championships, held for the very first time in Chennai, during December 99.
"I am delighted that we were able to sign off the Century with the equestrian meet at Chennai. In the business context, I am conscious that technological changes in computing, communication and media have built a strong customer monarchy and producers will have to be responsive and responsible to the customer for value.
``The new century has finally come and an exciting future will open up for performers," he said
Dr. Bharti, a psychiatrist practising at the Ramachandra Medical College, ended with a very sombre note, "I only wish that human beings are respected as individuals and not viewed as defective elements of a system .''
(Contributions from T. Krithika Reddy, Malathi Rangarajan, Savitha Padmanabhan and Srinath Narayan)
