
BANGALORE, JAN. 2. Fear gripped parts of Bangalore city as a mob of about 400, angered by an article, laid siege to The New Indian Express office here on Sunday. Lathi-charged and teargassed, the crowd ran amok, burning parked motor vehicles. At least 20 persons, including two photojournalists and many policemen were injured in the violence.
Amid mounting tension, the City Police Commissioner, Mr. T. Madiyal, has clamped prohibitory orders within a radius of one km around The New Indian Express office. Police security has been strengthened near the places of worship. Night patrolling has been tightened throughout the city. The developments in the city's sensitive areas are being closely monitored.
Earlier, two newspaper photographers bore the brunt of a violent backlash from a group, which was forcing shopkeepers to down their shutters at Anepalya in the Ashoknagar police limits. While Mr. B. K. Ramesh, a photojournalist of Udayavani was beaten up and his mobile phone and chain snatched away, the demonstrators targeted Mr. Vijay Kumar of Janavahini along with his photographic equipment. The Seshadripuram Assistant Commissioner of Police, Mr. B. Sudhakar Hegde, and the Deputy Commissioner of Police (CAR-South), Mr. Narayana Swamy, were among the injured.
Near this newspaper office on the Cunningham Road- Infantry Road junction, a truck was set ablaze by two miscreants. When some of the press employees tried to extinguish the flames, a group of about 20 persons threw stones at them, injuring an employee. By the time the fire tenders reached the spot, the truck and the 74 newsprint rolls in it were completely burnt.
The windowpanes of a news agency on Queen's Road was also targeted.
Incensed by the newspaper article, a crowd of about 100 had collected outside the The New Indian Express office on Sunday morning. Shouting slogans, demanding the arrest of the writer of the article, they threatened to storm the office. An unconditional written apology from the newspaper and the presence of a large police posse failed to disperse the angry crowd.
As the day progressed, the crowd swelled to about 400. Some of them tore down the banner of apology pasted on the Indian Express nameplate. Soon, it was time for breaking the Ramzan fast. They prayed on the road, cleared of traffic by the police. Persuaded by the police and their community leaders, the demonstrators moved to the Queen's circle. Squatting there, they broke their fast. Trouble began soon after.
The crowd was back on its feet, some trying to break the police barricade. When a lathi-charge failed to disperse them, police burst teargas shells. Running in all directions, some were caught inside a restaurant. They were caned by policemen, who barged into the eatery. Many two-wheelers were damaged in the melee.
Early Sunday morning, at about 2 a.m., a big crowd had gathered outside The New Indian Express office. The demonstrators were chased away by police. They returned on daybreak.
The Karnataka Muslim Advocates' Forum has said that it is considering taking legal action with regard to the news article which had ``agitated'' the minds of the Muslims. In a statement, the general secretary of the Forum, Mr. C. R. Abdul Rasheed, appealed to the Muslims to maintain peace, particularly as it was the holy month of Ramzan.
