
CHENNAI, JAN. 3. The TMC president, Mr. G.K. Moopanar, left today for Delhi, presumably with a specific agenda for finalisation of the proposal for an alternative Government in Pondicherry, which is bound to pave the way for establishing a working arrangement between the Congress(I) and the TMC in Tamil Nadu. That, Mr. S.R. Balasubramaniam, member of the political affairs committee of the TMC who is handling the Pondicherry issue, and Mr. V. Narayanasamy, a senior leader of the Congress(I) in the Union Territory, had also left for the Capital this morning, points to the priority accorded to the Pondicherry issue in Mr. Moopanar's agenda.
The urgency being evinced by the TMC leadership is mainly on account of its realisation that it is in a Catch 22 situation on the Pondicherry issue as the party can neither wriggle out of it nor postpone the eventuality at this stage.
In a normal situation, the events suggesting the possible change of Government in the Union Territory are followed in a casual manner both by politicians and the public alike.
It has now generated more interest than it deserved due to the following factors: The withdrawal of the TMC and the fall of the DMK-led coalition will formalise the divorce between the TMC and the DMK; the event has a potential for bringing in the TMC and the Congress(I) closer in future political activities and even neutral observers feel that if a viable alternative is put in place in Pondicherry it has the potential to remove the irritants between the TMC and the AIADMK.
What is causing surprise in political circles is that the DMK leadership, both in Pondicherry and in the party headquarters in Chennai, is not unduly perturbed - partly because of the behaviour of some local TMC and Congress(I) leaders and partly because of the perceptible casual dispensation of the Congress(I) high command.
Mr. Moopanar is deftly handling the issue without attracting much publicity lest any fiasco might boomerang on his party more particularly in the Union Territory.
An important dimension to the Pondicherry issue is the growing anxiety on the part of many TNCC(I) leaders and activists to bring Mr. Moopanar and his party closer to the Congress(I). A striking development, in this context they point out, is that without inhibitions, Mr. Moopanar has been participating in functions organised by the TNCC(I) leaders, and also, senior TNCC(I) leaders are invited for functions organised by the TMC.
This atmosphere of cordiality, it is expected may lead to the fruition of the plan for an alternative Government in Pondicherry.
