
BALIKUDA (Orissa), JAN. 2. Hope is rapidly turning into despair for the lakhs of survivors of the October super-cyclone in the coastal districts of Orissa as little has been done by the Government till date to help them rebuild their life.
Whatever little that is happening is primarily due to the courtesy of the voluntary agencies, which are keeping the hopes alive.
Visiting the worst-hit blocks of Ersama, Balikuda, Astaranga and Gobindapur one feels that much more could have been done during the past two months had there been proper coordination between the Government and the voluntary sector.
In fact, the authorities had extended some cooperation to the voluntary agencies during the distribution of food material and other essential items soon after the tragedy.
Once the relief distribution was stopped, there was a difficult phase of restoration and reconstruction. There has not been much coordination between the State Government and the Non- Governmental Organisations.
``A collaborative policy framework between the State Government and the NGOs should have been in place by now for the reconstruction and restoration work in the cyclone-hit districts,'' Mr. Jagadananda of the Centre for Youth and Social Development (CYSD), a prominent Bhubaneswar-based NGO working in the affected areas said.
``The cooperation from the Government has been very little.''
Even though the State Government has not started its `food for work' schemes in the cyclone-ravaged districts so far, the CYSD is constructing an earthen embankment on the river Alka in Goteswarpur village of Balikuda block of Jagatsinghpur under its `food for work' programme.
The embankment - the construction of which started on December 27 and will be completed tomorrow (Monday) - would help irrigate about 20,000 acres of land in the vicinity.
With no support from the authorities, the CYSD volunteers have been able to motivate over 500 people from as many as 20 nearby villages in addition to scores of volunteers from outside the State to construct the check dam. Each villager is being given food during lunch time, and at the end of the day's work, he gets 3 kg rice and 500 gm dal to take home.
Mr. Jagadananda, who was overseeing the construction of the embankment, said that the aim was to nurture the spirit of the cyclone-hit population so that they would involve themselves in the entire reconstruction process. The Government should replicate such projects, he suggested.
Several other NGOs such as the Lutheran World Service, Bharat Gyan Bharati and Utkal Bipanna Sahayata Samiti are also at work in the region and are organising `food for work' programmes for reconstruction and repair of village roads, cleaning of village ponds, putting up temporary shelters for primary schools etc.
Many NGOs have also drawn up long-term rehabilitation plans for the survivors. As soon as the distribution of emergency relief was stopped, these organisations have been mobilising the survivors to take up various works ranging from kitchen gardening to setting up of seed banks for their own benefit. Many are still providing one meal a day to the children of the affected villagers as the elders are without work.
People in several villages under Ersama and Balikuda blocks complained that they had received 20 kg of rice at the rate of Rs. 4 per kg only once during the past two months despite the Government's announcement that such supplies would come every month.
Even though the buildings of almost all the educational institutions had collapsed in the worst-hit areas, the authorities have not been able to start repair or reconstruction of these buildings.
They have even failed to supply books to the students in the region till date. However, a large number of students have already got books from different NGOs.
With disbursement of house building assistance half- way through and payment of ex-gratia for the deaths yet to begin, the affected population is totally in the dark about the various housing schemes that the authorities have been talking about.
As everything is taking time on the Government's side, the people, whose houses have been completely damaged by the high- speed gale or washed away by the tidal waves, are not sure whether they would get assistance to build proper houses before the coming monsoon.
With the house building assistance amount insufficient for construction of dwelling units, they are headed towards an excruciatingly hot and humid summer.
