
NEW DELHI, JAN. 4. The Chairperson of the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC), Mr. Justice J.S. Verma, has written to the Chief Justices of High Courts and Chief Ministers of all the States, emphasising the importance and need to make ``every effort to improve our human rights record.''
In a letter addressed to them on January 1, Mr. Justice Verma said that the acknowledged index of civilisation in the international community was the track record of respect for human rights in the country.
In his letter to the Chief Justices, he has asked them to give appropriate instructions to District and Sessions Judges (DSJs) to take necessary steps to resolve the acute problem of over crowding in prisons and long pendency of cases.
He said during the last five years, the members of the commission and its senior officers had visited prisons in various parts of the country and were appalled by the spectacle of overcrowding, insanitary conditions and mismanagement of prison administration. The problem was further compounded by the lack of sensitivity on the part of the prison staff to basic human rights of the prisoners.
During these visits, the commission was informed that the DSJs were not regular in visiting the prisons and the district committees headed by them were not meeting at regular intervals to review the conditions of prisoners. Indeed in many jails there was a predominance of undertrials languishing, because their cases were not being decided early.
Mr. Justice Verma has therefore recommended that the DSJs during their visits, could look into serious problems and ensure prison administration and speedy trials, as these problems had an impact of violating a human right which was given the status of Constitutional guarantee.
In his letter to the Chief Ministers, Mr. Justice Verma observed that in spite of Human Rights Cells set up in various police headquarters, ``there has not been any significant decline in genuine complaints of human rights violations committed by the police. There can be no serious dispute about the need to improve the mindset of the personnel wielding power and authority and thereby the perception necessary for the appropriate human rights culture which is people-friendly''.
Mr. Justice Verma has also drawn the attention of the Chairpersons of State Human Rights Commission to rededicate themselves for the uplift of the common man and for developing a human rights culture in every sphere of life and instruments of governance.
