
SELINE AUGUSTINE
If you have a head for numbers and figures, in other words if you are good in mathematics that is a big asset. The maths brain, you will find, can usually tackle other subjects easily. At the Headstart School run by Vidyothasahi Educational and Charitable Trust and located in Kottivakkam on the outskirts of Chennai, Mr. and Mrs. Mahesh who run the school are determined to provide the very young with this edge.
A visit to the maths exhibition put up by the students from pre- Kg to Class I showed how learning has been linked with play, which is an integral part of childhood.
"I hear and I forget. I see and I remember. I do and I understand."
Children learn best as they experience and enjoy. The little ones at Headstart are taken through different dimension of a single concept so that they understand the same from as many angles as possible. This trains the child to look at all matters of learning from various angles and the child is encouraged to develop a sense of lateral thinking.
The concrete examples reinforce the learning process as they not only hear or see, but also do. The activities have been developed with age appropriate models and are from the immediate environment of the child. Beads, counters, ball, thread and buttons are used. The learning process is never felt as work because the child is playing while imbibing the essentials.
Thus the children stop considering Mathematics as a tough subject and start assimilating facts and skills with confidence, says Mr. Mahesh.
The Mathematics for LKG included quantitative meaning of numbers, finding missing numbers, finding numbers that come before and after 1 to 10. In the chart done by UKG students, you find that identification of size has also helped their drawing skills. The teacher has drawn a car, a butterfly, a flower and asked the child to draw by the side a bigger or shorter version of the same.
Nazreen, mother of Zajid, tow plus, says her son enjoy learning in this way and goes to school happily. The parents of Aishwarya, 2 1/2 says her daughter has picked up a fantastic vocabulary after going for just four months to school.
Mrs. Sudha Mahesh, author of the textbooks "Fun with Maths" Levels I and II, insists that only during the second term at LKG level, they make the children write 1 to 10. The alphabet covers even later. "We supplement our teaching with a collection of 60 CD-Roms (includes Microsoft's My personal tutor 4 CDs,Edmark series). The children enjoy the computer class no end", she says.
