
JAMMU, JAN. 31. Even after ten years of militancy and at the end of the century, there is no message of peace in sight as Kashmir seems to be stepping into the new millennium with a ``disgusting note'' of a plane hijacking directly connected with the problem of Kashmir. The senseless violence not only continues unabated but has taken new dimensions.
While the entire world witnessing rapid changes in almost every sphere of life, a commoner in Kashmir is as dejected as he was a decade ago. Having seen many ups and downs, not necessarily since 1989 when the Kalashnikov arrived to change everything in their life but when India was partitioned 52 years ago and this part of the sub-continent plunged into an era of uncertainty, the Valley alongwith parts of Doda, Rajouri and Poonch in Jammu had to go through the pain of bullets, bombs and mines taking a heavy toll.
`Popular Government
Notwithstanding the fact that a ``popularly'' elected Government is in power which replaced the tiring seven years of gubernatorial rule in 1996, the things are changing from bad to worse with the security forces losing grip over the situation. Though those at the helm of affairs are reluctant to accept the ground reality it is evident that the dawning of the new century holds no message which could give a sense of comfort. For the Chief Minister, Dr. Farooq Abdullah, it is Pakistan which is responsible for the destruction in the valley. ``Pakistan has now earned the title of being mother of terrorism'' he remarked.
This year the violence started increasing with foreigners taking control of the militancy and devising ``devastating'' policies to take on security forces. The militant organisations of local origin barring Hizbul Mujahideen started going to the background with more organised militant outfits, Lashkare Toiba, Harkat Jehadi Islami and Harkatul Mujahideen calling the shots. They not only registered their presence by striking ``effectively'' at security forces but started a major front with the help of Pakistan in Kargil which lasted for 72 days.
Kargil conflict
Though the climax was seen as a setback to Mujahideen, there was hardly any indication of they leaving the ground. More significantly, the foreigners who earlier chose to leave valley for winter months have stayed back this season.
After Kargil, the militants resorted to a new strategy of storming camps of the security force starting with an attack on BSF in Bandipore in the border district of Kupwara, then sneaking into the highly protected 15 Corps headquarters where the Public Relations Officer Major Pramod Purushottam was gunned down alongwith seven others. Even as the authorities maintain that PRO's office hardly forms part of headquarters, the fact remains that it is within the compound of the army's head office in Srinagar. And lastly came the suicidal attack on the headquarters of the Special Operations Group (SOG) of J & K Police in Srinagar on Monday killing 13 policemen including a DSP. The Director General of Police, Mr. Gurbachan Jagat, who has been heading the police since 1997 candidly admits that the recent attacks were a setback to the process of fighting militants. ``They are better trained, know the war skills and and are well equipped as far as arms are concerned'' he said. Explaining that the militancy has many phases and it is one of them, he hoped to ``overcome it''. However, reports indicating larger presence of these hardcore militants with sizable number of suicide squads may not make it easy for the forces to ensure lasting peace. ``For a determined person it is no problem to sneak in'' remarked a senior army officer when asked about the entry of Lashkar militants into Badamibagh cantonment in November.
On political front, the vacuum as ever remains there. The ruling National Conference (NC) fails to show its presence in the valley as its cadres are the regular target which forces the workers to take refuge in the protected areas or Jammu. Separatist conglomerate All Parties Hurriet Conference (APHC) is in shambles with most of its leadership behind the bars. Its acting chairman, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq, has been registering his presence in Jamia Masjid on Fridays and the senior leader, Mr. Abdul Gani Lone, who returned from U.S. without being treated is convalescing in Delhi, though active despite being cardiac patient.
