
MUMBAI, JAN. 2. The year leading to the millennium year has in many ways been a unique one for the stock markets. The capital market of equities witnessed a number of events in these 12 months which have been reflected in strong rallies and falls. However, net-on-net the year has seen huge gains for both Index and other scrips.
The big question at the beginning of the new year is Where do we go now? ``Everybody is convinced that the Information Technology (IT) sector will continue to show phenomenal growth.
Alongwith IT related sectors like telecom and anything to do with computers, internet and data will be in the limelight during 2000,'' said Mr. Arun Kejriwal, chief dealer, Woodstock Securities.
New companies to watch out for would include multimedia companies, optical fibre manufacturers, and Internet service providers. According to him, the bourses are likely to witness more volatile trade during the year along with a rise in total traded volume and net outstandings. Said Mr. Kejriwal, ``the key to making money in 2000 is quicker entry and exit as news with modern technology will spread even faster.''
``We believe that the best sectors to buy in the new year would be cement, infotech, auto, telecom, entertainment and pharmaceuticals,'' said Mr. Prateek Agrawal, Equity Analyst of SBI Capital Markets. Non-ferrous metal and oil exploration and refining stocks should also impress. Steel stocks should continue to underperform for some more time on continued negative news on the profit front though steel prices have been on an uptrend. Hotel stocks suffer from low occupancy levels and low realty prices and are expected to underperform till occupancy levels move up. The fast moving consumer goods (FMCG) sector should also outperform. Banking should be a market performer. ``With several power projects (of listed companies) coming up and with progressive easing of the interest rates,'' Mr. Agrawal believes, ``the power sector stocks should outperform.''
According to Mr. Kejriwal, some companies outside the IT sector which may shine during 2000 include refinery stocks such as BPCL, HPCL, Reliance Petro and Indian Oil Corporation, optical fibre manufacturers such as Himachal Futuristic, Usha Beltron, Vindhya Telelink and Birla Ericsson, multimedia stocks such as Pentafour Software and Zee Telefilm, and Indian giants Reliance Industries and Larson & Toubro.
Mr. Agrawal said that most of the commodities are showing distinct signs of revival. In the steel sector, HR coil prices are now higher than levels seen in the same period of last year. The year just gone by saw a quantum leap in the capital market. On more than four or five occasions the combined BSE and NSE turnover crossed the magical $2 billion mark and it should not come as a surprise if during 2000 it breaches the $ 3 billion mark.
Last year saw the foreign institutional investors (FIIs) coming of age and learning to become contrarians in the market. Mr. Kejriwal said that the continued and consistent FII purchases had improved sentiment on Indian bourses as a whole.
The Bombay Stock Exchange 30-Share Sensitive Index (Sensex) rallied from 3055.41 at the end of 1998 to 5005.82 at the end of 1999 - a gain of 63.8 per cent. While this rise seems to be phenomenal, it should be also be viewed in the light of the fact that the Government was voted out of power at end-April when the Index made a low of 3183. This effectively meant that in four months the net gain was a measly 138 points. Immediately thereafter there was a stunning rally which saw the Sensex peak at 4197 points - a rise of just over 1,000 points in three weeks.
The start of the Kargil conflict a week later saw the Sensex lose 500 points when it made a low of 3675 on May 28.
That was a watershed point and the Sensex never looked back thereafter. The bourses saw a new all time high for the Sensex at 4810 on July 15, which further improved when the Sensex touched 5150 on October 11.
The overall performance of the Sensex had been good but that of the broader indices has been even better. The BSE-200 which closed in 1998 at 313.95 closed at the end of 1999 at 592.39, a gain of 120.5 per cent. The BSE-100 closed at 1359.03 at the end of 1998 closed last year at 2624.49, a gain of 71.04 per cent. The story of the year has been the meteoric rise in IT stocks, led by ``Infy'' (Infosys Technologies) on NASDAQ as well as domestically.
The scrip rose from Rs 1,479 (adjusted for bonus) to close at Rs. 14,516 almost ten times higher in 12 months. The success story of the industry does not end with one Infosys. The other big winners included Satyam Computers, Wipro, Digital Equipment, Silverline, Rolta, NIIT, Visual Soft, Aptech and Aftek Infosys.
Many other sectors and companies try to keep pace with the IT sector. While some came close others failed and a few even went into negative territory.
The second half of 1999 also saw a welcome resurgence of the primary market with the success of initial public offerings (IPOs) like Hughes Software, Polaris Software and yet to be listed HCL Technologies met with huge success during the application as well as the premium after listing.
