
K. Srikkanth
If it had been the first time that it had happened, I might have said that the technique of the Indian batsmen is not Y2K compliant. But the sorry tale began at Adelaide last year and the nightmare for the Indian team has continued into the new millennium. No relief seems to be in sight as the team has plumbed the depths.
The bottom line is, apart from Sachin Tendulkar - the lone, shining exception - nobody in this team seems to possess the talent required to play the quick stuff. This team seems incapable of playing genuine fast bowling. Quite apart from the fact that the team gets bowled out for low totals, what is alarming is the manner in which the batsmen are getting out. I was appalled to see the way Laxman, Kanitkar and Agarkar were dismissed.
M.S.K. Prasad did manage to last 10 overs, but he was getting beaten almost every ball and McGrath, visibly frustrated, was scratching his head in dismay before the Indian wicketkeeper nicked one to Mark Waugh. But I believe he still did a better job than Devang Gandhi.
The one batsman who has really disappointed me is Rahul Dravid. I thought he had the talent and temperament to deal with the quick stuff. Too see him struggling, looking like he'd get out any time, is rather sad. If he is unable to come to terms with fast bowling from McGrath and Brett Lee, then it only goes to show that he lacks confidence more than anything else.
More often balls have gone off Dravid's inner edge than from the middle of his bat. But, then, in the last few weeks in Australia I have seen many of our top batsmen score runs in similar fashion and we have also got a lot of runs from leg byes. Not surprisingly, quite a few got out dragging the ball on to the stumps. Such statistics may not always present a true picture, but they give a fair indication of the Indian team's approach down under.
Of course, the glorious exception has been Tendulkar. He has stood with his head up among the ruins and has seemed prepared to take the fight into the enemy camp. But the gap between Tendulkar and the rest is widening more and more even as it becomes obvious that it would be ridiculous to expect the captain to score a century each time he goes out to bat. At the end of the day, Tendulkar must have been wondering if he did the right thing in choosing to bat first. It was the right decision; what can he do if his batsmen cannot deliver.
Finally, a word about Lee. The young man came up with another impressive performance. His speed and accuracy are quite astounding.
