
A stunning range of ancient musical instruments are displayed at a museum in Chennai. KAUSALYA SANTHANAM writes about the collection.
AS A wooden stick is gently run along the circular rim of the Nandi-crested bell, the primordial sound "Om" reverberates through the huge hall. As its melodic tones engulf us, we are taken to the origins of music, the source of the Sapta swaras.
The "Pranava Ghanta" (Om Bell) forms part of a stunning range of musical instruments displayed at the Development Centre for Musical Instruments (Sangita Vadyalaya), Office of the Development Commissioner (Handicrafts), Government of India, at 759, Anna Salai.
The beautifully crafted instruments waft in the resplendent notes of our musical heritage. The unique shapes and forms speak of a tradition that can be traced to antiquity. The simple and the sophisticated, the familiar and the unusual, the traditional and the contemporary find place here. The whole scale of melody and rhythm is traversed from the Tata Vadyas (stringed instruments), to the Sushira vadyas (wind instruments), the Avanaddha (skin covered) to the Ghana vadhyas (solid and weighty, made of metal or wood). Instruments used in concerts, in temple processions, folk and martial music are displayed. The exhibits include those from across our country and also from various corners of the world.
The replicas of ancient instruments encapsulate layers of history within their graceful forms. Especially eye-catching is the harp- like Yazh. References to this Dravidian instrument abound in literature and legend. In the Silappadhikaram, Ilango Adigal describes the yazh and it also finds mention in the Pathu Paatu.
Four types of Yazh are detailed in the Sangam classic. The Makara Yazh with the head of an alligator and canine body and limbs, the Senkottu Yazh shaped like a boat as also the Sagoda Yazh, and the Periyazh also known as Paravai Yazh. The Vil Yazh in the form of a bow points to the origins of the instrument as it was born from the twang of the arrow from the hunter's bow.
The Senkottu Yazh is described by the poet to have been used by the milkmaids of Madura when they performed the Rasa Krida to entertain Kovalan and Kannagi while the Sagoda Yazh was strummed by Madhavi to hold her lover in thrall.
The yazh, cumbersome and deficient in tonal finesse was replaced by the veena by the 10th century AD.
The other instruments that lure the lovers of history and legend at the Vadhyalaya are the stringed Ravastran associated with the Demon King and the Kinnari which is traced to the celestial musicians, the Kinnaras. The sacred Damru of the Lord of dance and the Vedic lute vie for attention with the Rudra veena which Lankeswaran is said have played before Lord Shiva and the Saraswati or Kachchapi veena identified with Sage Narada. The Balasaraswati or Mayuri summons up the image of rich palace interiors. Shaped like a peacock and adorned with iridiscent plumage, it seems to invite the bejewelled fingers of graceful princesses to play on its moveable frets. The dragon headed Kokkara of Kerala and the three faced drum, Pushkaram, are some of the oldest instruments of the sub-continent.
The heriditary craftsmen at the centre have recreated the ancient instruments from depictions in sculpture and references in literature. Gopal who guides one around the gallery has absorbed the nuances of the craft from his father Somu Achary and they have both fashioned many of the instruments here.
Set up in 1956 as an ancillary organ of the All India Handicrafts Board, Government of India, the Centre is perhaps the only one of its kind in the country. The lack of a permanent location is a drawback for it has been shifted at least twice since its inception. Under its first Honarary Director, Prof. S. Sambamoorthy, Head of the Department of Indian Music, University of Madras, the centre took rapid strides. The impetus was maintained by successive directors and considerable progress was made in working towards its aims. These include reviving the art of manufacture of musical instruments, organising a gallery of ancient and modern instruments, reconstructing obsolete instruments and making them functional, conducting research and publishing material. But now the centre functions mainly as a museum.
There are 200 instruments in the gallery and not one of them is a mere model. They can all be played upon and have even been used by leading singers and dancers in recitals.
Among the rare musical instruments recreated here are the fish- shaped stringed instrument, the Matsya veena, the versatile Pancha Vadyan, the cobra shaped and the stone Nagaswaram. The Narayana veena combines the harp, the chitra veena and the tambura in one and is modelled on the Japanese Koto.
The forms are fascinating and there are some amazing combinations. The tambura lends itself to an imaginative variety. The huge Om shaped tambura is matched in its imposing appearance by the electronically operated revolving one while the four faced drone has a lesser cousin in the two faced one. To aid the travelling musician is the collapsible tambura and to lessen his burden are those that have dispensed with the Kodam. The Vamsee Sruthi made from bamboo, the Sruthi dandi fashioned from wood and the Vamsee Sruthi dandi which is made of a combination of wood and bamboo were researched and developed under the guidance of Director T. Lokanadha Sarma in the late Seventies.
Experimentation in the materials used have resulted in novel items such as the bamboo splinters veena, the red cedar and the cane splinters one where the Kodam is made from splinters of the material mentioned rather than the traditional jackwood.
Instruments used in temple festivals are prominently displayed. The piece de resistance is the impressive Pancha Mukha Vadyam played in the Thiruvarur temple. The music that throbs in the hearts of the rural folk and is expressed in joyous rhythm through their simple instruments is not neglected. So we see the Pambai and Kidikittu vadhyam of Tamil Nadu and the Jamidika of Andhra Pradesh .
Mizoram holds pride of place as its folk instruments are displayed at the entrance to the museum. The gongs - the Darkhuang, the Darbu and the Darmang - when struck bring the echoes from the hills to the heart of a busy city.
From the North come various stringed instruments - the Kashmiri rabab, the Swarabat, the Tukari of Assam and numerous types of sitar. The Saase Kashmiri with which Saint Meera sang her mellifluous bhajans to her Giridhar-Gopala is a striking exhibit.
The inspiration from across the seas has crystallised in the Indonesian bamboo violin, the quaint walking stick guitar, the Russian popular guitar, the European phono violin, the Chinese flute and the musical bow from Thailand among others. Forty five musical instruments have been developed at the Centre.
The museum attracts visitors from abroad and groups of students says Mr. A. M. Abdul Khader, Assistant Director (Textiles), Office of The Development Commissioner (Handicrafts) now holding additional charge of the Vadyalaya. "We encourage artisans to enlist in training programmes for the manufacture of musical instruments," says Mr. Khader. "Ten to 15 artisans are trained in a batch for one year and honorariums and stipends are paid. Though we have not made it a production unit as it will amount to commercialisation, we guide those who are interested as to where instruments can be obtained and repaired. We also participate in exhibitions from time to time." Craftsman Gopal is adept at making miniature models too.
As the city resounds with music in December, it is rewarding to stand amidst this wonderful medley and recall the contribution of nameless artisans and practioners through the millennia in shaping our national spirit in rhythm and melody.
