
WITH THE RELEASE of the hostages and the hijackers driving away to freedom, it is now time for the Government of India and various agencies to piece together all sordid details of the hijack drama. Starting from what happened at the Kathmandu airport and how the hijackers managed to smuggle weapons and explosives into the IA aircraft, to the delay in responding to the crisis at Amritsar and letting go of the opportunity to deal with the hijackers when the plane stopped in Abu Dhabi, there is a lot that the Government must explain. The Centre and its crisis management team may try to justify the swap of three terrorists for 160 passengers as they ran out of options in Kandahar. Even the families and the freed hostages may be ever grateful to the Centre for the barter. But letting go such prized militants can only put a damper on the armed forces and the administration in Jammu and Kashmir. That makes it all the more imperative for the Centre to go in for a full-fledged inquiry into the entire sequence of events to identify the lapses if any and suggest corrective action to plug the loopholes.
First of all, it is unfortunate that both the Prime Minister and the Civil Aviation Minister were not informed of the hijack until they landed in New Delhi at the end of their journey from Patna. This probably delayed the setting up of a Crisis Management Group and dispatching of commandos to Amritsar in time. After the aircraft was allowed to fly out of Indian skies, there was a second chance to deal with the hijackers at the Al Minhad airbase in the UAE or in Abu Dhabi. The nation needs to know why the Centre could not do anything until the aircraft finally landed in the `hostile territory' of the Taliban. It is clear that the Taliban authorities did not play the `honest broker' or third party which they professed to be. Similarly, there have been claims and denials about the identity of the hijackers. The Centre must come clean on this issue and unmask the hijackers. Evidence of Pakistan's and the Taliban's complicity needs to be pursued. All the details of what weapons the hijackers first had and whether there were any additions in Lahore and Kandahar must be made public, at least now.
Above all, there needs to be a comprehensive review of the security arrangements in airports, jails and Indian missions which may be targets and the whole security procedure for boarding aircraft. If certain facilities cannot be provided in some foreign airports like Kathmandu, Indian Airlines or Air India must introduce a special security check before passengers board the aircraft. Now that India has been forced to trade three militants for 160 hostages, the incidence of hijacking can increase and Kandahar may well become a negotiating hub for Islamic militants. The U.N. must come to grips with this problem of cross-border terrorism and put in place an effective mechanism to deal with such incidents. There is need for global conventions to deal with hijackers, at least to make sure they do not go scot-free after killing innocent hostages and securing the release of known terrorists. Suspension of flights to Kathmandu may not be a solution, and the Government needs to come up with new security arrangements. Pilots and cabin crew need more training to deal with such situations and an emergency, coded signal to alert the nearest airport. It may be useful to devise methods for enabling the pilot to immobilise the aircraft when the need arises, as it arose at Amritsar. Without going to town on the freeing of the terrorists, the Opposition could well ask for a white paper on the hijack when Parliament meets again.
