
BANGALORE, JAN. 3. The Bangalore Development Authority (BDA) incurred a loss of Rs. 2.5 crores due to a decision of the Byatarayanapura City Municipal Council to approve a private layout, sponsored by the Talacauvery House Building Cooperative Society. It is a clear case of the fence eating the crop. Because most of the office- bearers and members of the society are employees of the State Revenue Department, and that clinched the deal in their favour. The council, which met on September 16, 1998, resolved to approve the plan for forming around 500 sites in an area of 30 acres and 7 guntas at Amruthahalli in its jurisdiction, subject to certain conditions. This was an eyewash, as a number of structures would have come up by the time any court gave its ruling on the decision, and hence redundant.
By this questionable decision, the CMC helped the society in violating the Karnataka Urban and Rural Development Act 1961 Section 76 (M). Thus, the CMC allegedly connived with the society in helping the latter avoid paying Rs. 2,48,02,910 to the BDA, which even directed its engineering staff to initiate action against it. The society had already built an overhead tank and a reservoir. But the warning did not come into effect for reasons best known to the authorities in the BDA, although it reminded the CMC twice in 1995 and 1997 of the violation of rules. The BDA held a meeting on September 22, 1998 in which the presidents and commissioners of CMCs such as Dasarahalli, Pattanagere, Byatarayanapura, Bommanahalli, Yelahanka and Mahadevapura took part.
The meeting was addressed among the others by the BDA Commissioner and other senior officers and the CMC presidents were told to abide by the Act.
Mr. K. N. Chakrapani, councillor and working president of the Yuva Janata Dal(S), who has been opposing the move of the CMC, wrote to the then Deputy Chief Minister, Mr. Siddaramaiah, the Home Minister, Mr. P.G.R. Sindhia, the Minister for Large and Medium Industries, Mr. B. L. Shankar, and the then Minister of State for Municipal Administration, Mr. Mirajuddin Patel, urging them to stop this serious irregularity and not to allow the formation of the layout without paying Rs. 2.48 crores to BDA. He also urged the ministers to entrust the scandal to the Corps of Detectives for an enquiry. But Mr. Sindhia did not take any action.
According to Mr. Chakrapani, sufficient allocation for parks, civic amenities and roads had not been made while forming the layout, which will affect the allottees when the area is developed. He had also said in his letters to the ministers that the CMC Commissioner, Mr. Prasanna Kumar, had shown undue interest in sanctioning the plan.
These charges were referred to the Director of Municipal Administration, Mr. H. Bhaskar, and other officers for their opinion.
Mr. Bhaskar, under whom all the municipalities in the State except the Bangalore Mahanagara Palike came, reportedly gave a report to the Government supporting the stand taken by the CMC.
The Urban Development Secretary, quoting the letters by the DMA, the DC and the CMC president, said in his letter of September 20, 1999 that the CMC had already laid roads, underground water lines and put up street lights, which the BDA wanted to carry out after collecting the charges.
Taking advantage of the general elections, the work in the layout was speeded up. Now, Mr. Chakrapani has again approached the Government, and this time, with an appeal to the Chief Minister, Mr. S. M. Krishna. He has urged Mr. Krishna to take action against the officials involved.
