
NEW DELHI, JAN. 2. Astrologers may claim that they saw it coming (with hindsight they always do) and nobody may sit down, in the fashion of John Reed, to write ``Seven Days that Shook India''. But the fact is that not even the gloomiest of prophets of doom could have foreseen the events of the past week, which brought over 160 people to the brink of death.
In far less trying circumstances, Ghalib had lamented that God hadn't been fair to him saying: ``Zindagi apni kuch is shakl se guzri Ghalib, hum bhi kya yaad karenge ke Khuda rakhte the'' (thanks to the twists and turns my life has been through, I'll always remember that there is a God to contend with). And again: ``Hum kahan ke daana the, kis hunar me yakta the besabad hua Ghalib dushman aasman apna'' (I am not the wisest of men, so why is God so jealous and unjust to me).
Yet it was to God that the hostages' families turned when nothing seemed to be working, and they thought there was no light at the end of the tunnel. The TV images of men, women and politicos visiting places of worship and attending all-religion prayers were chilling reminders of human vulnerability, reinforcing the view that when the chips are really down, there is only one hope: the God up there. You don't play dice with God, and this past week nobody did.
The week seemed straight out of a Kafka script, full of shadowy figures, false leads, half-truths, foes masquerading as friends and things seemingly moving without getting anywhere. Whose side was the Taliban on, for instance? Ours, as Mr. Jaswant Singh seemed to suggest last Sunday? Or theirs, as conventional wisdom now suggests? Was ``Khyber'', the ever-eager and ultra-obliging supplier of (dis/mis)information to the India media, for real? And whose tune was the Time man in Afghanistan singing?
There was much talk of ``media management'', even as some in the Government thought that a section of the media was actually hostile. The Foreign Minister publicly accused them of ``exploiting'' the ``anguish'' of the hostages and their families by asking him inconvenient questions. The media, on its part, accused the Government of playing favourites and there was a near ``riot'' when the crew of a particular TV network was picked up to accompany the Foreign Minister to Kandahar. Others protested, and protested so hard that the Government was forced to drop its ``favourite'' network; and Mr. Jaswant Singh travelled alone - of course, with some very hardcore militants for company.
The domestic electronic media may have missed out on reporting first-hand the ``final'' act, but for much of the week it worked overtime to keep viewers glued to television screens. Occasionally, it overreached itself, made mistakes as competing TV channels stepped on each other's toes to be the first with the news, and carried the ``talking heads'' syndrome to the point of boredom but in the end it did keep people informed.
If there was any whipping boy, it was the Government - placed, as it was, in a situation where it was damned if it did, and it was damned if it didn't. In the end, it did - and, critics tell you, that the egg is all over its face.
