
ISLAMABAD, DEC.31. Four chairmen in six months, five coaches in one year and now International Cricket Council's one-month ban on speedster Shoaib Akhtar. This is how one could best describe Pakistan's cricket of 1999.
The wounds of defeat in the World Cup final and the 3- 0 drubbing in Test series against Australia were not yet completely healed that a news on New Millennium eve came that Shoaib could not compete in international cricket until he changes his bowling action. Without elaborating, the ICC wants Shoaib to remodel his action and that is the most confusing part of the verdict. This not only depresses Shoaib, now planning to pack his bags at Perth, but the officials of the cricket board
in Pakistan. Headed by Lieutenant General Tauqir Zia, the Cricket Board was criticised by some quarters when it decided to send the 24-year-old `Rawalpindi Express' to Australia despite a pending inquiry at ICC's Panel of Illegal Deliveries against the fast bowler. The verdict against Shoaib came on December 30, the day Pakistan team landed at Perth. It could have been more appropriate had the PCB waited for the ICC's decision. They could have easily delayed the departure of the team by one day.
What's the fun now, he (Shoaib) will be back home, said a fuming former Test cricketer on condition of anonymity, who had advocated the idea that Shoaib should be held back until the ICC gives its ruling. When the news of Shoaib's complaint to ICC was first reported earlier in December, the PCB officials quickly denied it. The then chairman Dr. Zafar Altaf did not admit that the ICC had sent a letter of complaint along with video footage of Shoaib's action to the PCB. But he did give a hint when Javed Burki was replaced by Imran Khan on the panel of illegal deliveries from Pakistan.
However, surprisingly, when the day of hearing came, PCB failed to locate Imran's whereabouts, who was reportedly in Mexico. ``That is too strange, Imran should have been traced by the officials of PCB. Being himself a fast bowler, Imran could have pleaded Shoaib's case much better that a spinner (Intikhab Alam),'' said another former Test player.
Reuter adds:
Waqar to replace Akhtar
Waqar Younis was today named to replace suspended fellow Pakistan fast bowler Shoaib Akhtar, who is to return home from the team's tour of Australia after his action was ruled illegal.
