
ASTROPHYSICS OF THE SOLAR SYSTEM: K. D. Abhyankar; Universities Press (India) Limited, Orient Longman, 160, Anna Salai, Chennai- 600002. Rs. 275.
THE AUTHOR, doctorate holder from the University of California, Berkely, was professor of astronomy for over 30 years in the Osmania University. He feels that teaching of astronomy has not been given adequate importance in the universities. Addressing this lacuna, he published his first book Astrophysics - Stars and Galaxies in 1992 and now he presents the book under review here as a companion volume to it. The book offers a comprehensive account of the solar system.
The treatment is in textbook style with a quantitative analysis of the subject; the reader will find a generous sprinkling of mathematics throughout, which opens with a summary of the historical concepts in astronomy: the Aristotlean geocentric theory that held sway for a long time before being replaced in 1543 A.D. by the Copernican heliocentric theory.
Kepler's laws of planetary motion and Newton's law of universal gravitation are dealt with in some detail to explain how these laws solved the mystery of planetary motion in 1687 A.D. when Newton published his Principia. Then he goes on to explain the elements of celestial mechanics - the motion of bodies in the solar system and the special cases pertaining to this.
Essentially the principal aim of celestial mechanics is to calculate the position and velocity of a planet at any given time.
The launch of Sputnik I in October 1957 was a shot in the arm for man's quest for space, if a shot was needed. To understand the basis of the applications opened up by space probes one needs a thorough grounding in space dynamics and the chapter ``Elements of Space Dynamics'' deals with this, where in the author tells the reader about rocketry, energy requirements, escape velocity, inter-orbital transfer and lunar and other planetary probes.
The heart of the solar system is, of course, the sun whose mass is several times the combined mass of all its planets put together.
The author has devoted a chapter to deal with the properties of the sun - its vital statistics, distance from the Earth and other planets, spectral lines, solar activity and so on. This is followed by a chapter on our own planet where its physical properties are explained.
The author then goes on to discuss the evolution of life on our planet starting with the unicellular organism that appeared some 3.5 billion years ago ending with the space age.
Then the reader is taken through a lunar journey followed by an overview of the other planets - the inner and outer planet systems.
The discussion takes in such aspects as atmospheric composition, greenhouse effects, a mathematical treatment of the mass-radius relation and energy levels.
Other celestial objects like asteroids, comets, meteors, meteorites, satellites and planetary rings are discussed in some detail in a separate chapter, where the author presents Bode's law relating to the numerological relationship governing planetary distances. This law, later on renamed the Titius-Bode law, played an important role in the discovery of Uranus, the asteroid belt, and Neptune.
It has never been proved if Bode's law has any real meaning or is merely a coincidence, if it is a coincidence it is a remarkable one indeed.
There is a chapter on extra-terrestrial life where the author talks about the problems involved in the search for extra- terrestrial intelligence, SETI, an ambitious project.
The book ends with a chapter titled ``Time and Calendar'' where the author discusses various scales of time like Universal Time, Zonal Standard Time, Ephemeris Time, Sidereal Time and others.
He also tells the reader about the evolution of calendars from ancient times. The Indian almanac, based on a sidereal luni-solar calendar introduced by Aryabhatta in the 5th century A.D., finds mention in this concluding chapter.
The book brings together all the topics necessary to understand the formation and exploration of the solar system.
C. V. SUBRAMANIAM
