
WE proceed to establish the position sof the Moon in the Navamsa Chart. The Moon will be in one of the Padas (quarters) of the birth-star. For a birth in Aswini first pada, the Moon will be in Mesha in the Rasi and Navamsa Charts. Aswini second, third and fourth pada births will have the Moon in Mesha in the Rasi Chart, but in Rishabha, Mithuna, and Kataka respectively in the Navamsa Chart.
The Moon will still be in Mesha in the Rasi Chart for all Pada-s of Bharani, and for the first Pada of Krittika besides. But as its position shifts forward through these five Star Quarters, in Navamsa the Moon will be respectively in Simha, Kanya, Thula, Vrischika, and Dhanus.
This shows that when the Moon moves from Krittika 2 through to Mrigasira 2, it will be in Rishabha in the Rasi Chart, but be in Navamsa with each Pada thus: Makara, Kumbha, Meena, Mesha, Rishabha, Mithuna, Kataka, Simha, Kanya.
Similarly the Moon in Mithuna in the Rasi Chart, will be in one of the Nakshatra Pada-s reading from Mrigasira 3 to Punarvasu 3, and take one of the appropriate Navamsa Houses in order: Thula, Vrischika, Dhanus, Makara, Kumbha, Meena, Mesha, Rishabha, and Mithuna.
The Moon in Kataka in the Rasi Chart will be in one of the following Navamsa Signs: Kataka, Simha, Kanya, Thula, Vrischika, Dhanus, Makara, Kumbha, Meena.
What applies for the Moon in Mesha in the Rasi Chart will be valid for Navamsa Moon determination in Simha, and Dhanus too. There is common Navamsa Position order for the Moon in rasi Chart in Rashabha, Kanya and Makara; for the Moon located in Mithuna, Thula, and Kumbha; and for the Moon in Kataka, Vrischika and Meena in the Rasi Chart.
(See the Star-Pada Order in "Predictions by Rasi").
Queries answered
How does Guru-Chandala Yoga affect day-to-day life and when? Will it apply also when the combination is in 8th, 9th or 10th?
G. Chitra Kalyanaraman, Salem-7.
Weak Jupiter, in conjunction with Saturn or Rahu or Gulika, causes Guru-Chandala Yoga, making natives bent on momentary gain and material satisfaction gained somehow without regard for values or conscience. Weak Lagna and Lagna Lord will aggravate the situation.
The 7th house represents, friends, business partners, spouse etc. and this Yoga can harm such features. The Yoga is prominent in the 7th. Rahu or Guru Mahadasa may bring on the effects. The lordship of Jupiter and his placement in Rasi or Bhava and the aspects he receives must also be considered in estimating the effects.
If Rahu is favourable in Mesha, Rishabha, Kataka, Kanya, or Makara, material prosperity may not be denied to the native.
* * *
Good dates: Monday, January 3, 2000.
