
PONDICHERRY, JAN. 4. The Chief Minister, Mr. R. V. Janakiraman will meet the Prime Minister and Union Home and Finance Ministers again in Delhi on Wednesday to urge them, not to introduce uniform sales tax in the Union Territory. He said while speaking to presspersons here on Tuesdaythat his Cabinet colleagues Mr. S. P. Sivakumar and Mr. A.M.H. Nazeem, the Rajya Sabha member, Mr. C. P. Tirunavukkarasu and leaders of parties supporting the Government's stand would accompany him during his meeting with the Prime Minister and other Ministers.
This is the second visit of the Chief Minister and the DMK MLAs to Delhi to renew their appeal not to apply uniform sales tax pattern on the union territory. The last time he had led a delegation for the same purpose the team included the Lok Sabha member, Mr. M.O.H. Farook, who belongs to the Congress(I). On that occasion a memorandum had also been presented to the Central Ministers, making it clear as to why the new floor rate of tax could not be accepted by Pondicherry. Mr. Janakiraman said it was unfortunate that his efforts to arrive at an unanimous decision through an all-party leaders meeting on the issue, on December 31 did not prove fruitful. The resolution adopted at the cabinet meeting here on December 31, would also be presented to the Prime Minister and other Central Ministers to make the union territory's protest crystal clear.
Mr. Janakiraman said `the representatives of the parties he had invited for the Dec. 31 meeting were not willing to cooperate'. They had also taken a stand that they would not accompany him for the proposed talks in Delhi. But the dissenting parties were also against uniform sales tax. Thus with the object being the same and only the approach being different he would only appreciate the opposition parties that had decided to go as a joint team to Delhi to meet the Prime Minister and others separately in the next few days.
Mr. Janakiraman said it was the Pondicherry Administration that raised its voice against the uniform sales tax much ahead of other States and only then was New Delhi included in the seven member committee (Standing committee) to take stock of the situation. The Delhi ministry also adopted a resolution putting off the implementation of the new tax rate in the national capital.
The Governments of Bihar, Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan and the Northeastern States had also rejected the uniform sales tax. Some other States had not also fully accepted the new pattern of sales tax, he said. Mr. Janakiraman said `this information was authentic'. Without the consent of the government of a State in question the changes in the sales tax could never be enforced. This had been evidenced by the stand of the State Governments, he said.
Mr. Janakiraman said as long as there was a government headed by him in Pondicherry there would be no imposition of the uniform sales tax. He said the DMK president and Chief Minister, Mr. M. Karunanidhi would support Pondicherry.
Mr. Janakiraman also said the Government, the Ministry, legislators and parties supporting his views, would not hesitate to take recourse to agitations, to protect the welfare of the people.
