
THE SUPREME Court of India is celebrating its golden jubilee. One of the founding fathers of the Constitution, Alladi Krishnaswamy Iyer, pointed out that the Indian apex court had more powers than any of its counterparts anywhere in the world. Our Constitution has taken up the task of transforming a medieval hierarchical society into a modern equalitarian democracy. On the eve of the inauguration of the court, the first Chief Justice of India laid down, ``It shall be our endeavour to interpret the Constitution not as a rigid body, but as a living organism, having within itself the force and power of self-government. The Supreme Court, however, under the guise of interpretation cannot alter or amend the law.'' The court itself has assumed the role of the protector and guarantor of the fundamental rights as per the constitutional mandate. It has acted as the balancing wheel of the federation maintaining equilibrium between fundamental rights and the demands of social justice even while keeping all authorities functioning in India within their respective bounds. Half a century is a sufficient span of time to find out whether the Supreme Court has performed the role visualised by the Constitution.
``When we know how a nation state dispenses justice, we know with some exactness the moral character to which it can pretend'' (Prof. Laski). The Supreme Court has played a phenomenal role in upholding the fundamental rights of the citizens and has delivered landmark judgments quoted and followed even by courts in other countries of the Commonwealth. Discarding the Doctrine of Due Process of Law, it has still upheld the citizens' fundamental right to life and personal liberty in such famous rulings as A. K. Gopalan and Maneka Gandhi. The American doctrine of due process of law had become a sort of palladium covering all manners of individual rights and came to be applied to both procedural and substantive law.
The Supreme Court rejected arguments based on natural law and confined itself to statute law. The term ``personal liberty'' in Article 21 was considered by it as of wide amplitude covering a variety of rights, and it came to lay down notable doctrines in the evolution of jurisprudence such as the Doctrine of Prospective Overruling in the case of Golaknath and then the Doctrine of Basic Features in the case of Kesavananda Bharathi. While not standing in the way of social change, the court has made every endeavour to preserve the basic tenets of the Constitution as a sort of eternal verities to be followed. It has enlarged the scope of protection guaranteed under Art. 21 by including the right to free legal services as an inalienable element of reasonable, fair and just procedure. It came down heavily on third degree methods when it passed strictures on police cruelty in such cases as Kishore Singh vs the State of Rajasthan, Sunil Batra vs Delhi administration. Even convicts have a right to dignity. It has expanded the concept of fundamental rights to include the right to livelihood and the right to shelter.
Realising that the vast mass of the Indian populace is afflicted by the twin evils of illiteracy and poverty, making the enjoyment of fundamental rights a distant dream, the Supreme Court introduced the public interest litigation system and enlarged the concept of locus standi. It ruled, As the concept developed, courts have come to recognise the citizen's right to speedy trial, right against pollution, right to question Government policies opposed to public interest and even the right to seek investigation into dubious deals entered into by the Government. The PIL is now a weapon in the hands of public-spirited persons to reach social justice to the downtrodden. Even a letter to the Supreme Court can be treated, in certain circumstances, as a petition.
A letter from the Hazaribagh Legal Committee to Mr. Justice Bhagwati was enough to set in motion the judicial process which brought to light the atrocious, illegal detention of prisoners for two to three decades, depriving them of their inalienable right to freedom and liberty. Even a newspaper clipping was accepted as the basis of a PIL and this resulted in liberating the victims of bonded labour.
The Supreme Court has its share of success and failures. In the interpretation of the personal law of various communities, it has kept itself abreast of the times as can be seen from the views it has expressed with regard to the development of the Hindu Law and the Muslim Personal Law. Indeed, the Government of the day has chosen to be rather anachronistic in trying to reverse the progressive views of the court as happened with regard to the right to maintenance for divorced Muslim women in the Shah Bano case. At the same time, it is only in recent years that the court is having a change of direction while considering matters concerning gender justice. This is an area where the court's views are still evolving and required to be fine tuned.
In the constitutional field, the court has come to recognise the role of mutually antagonistic parties holding power at the Centre and in the State and, reversing its earlier attitude, has chosen to protect the rights of the State in a federal set-up in such cases like S. R. Bommai vs Union of India.
The failures of the court are as significant as its successes. At a time when the whole country was looking up to it for protection, the majority in the Supreme Court failed the Constitution and the country by denying the fundamental right to liberty in the notorious habeas corpus case. It was left to the solitary dissenting voice of Mr. Justice Khanna to declare powerfully that the right to liberty is sacrosanct and even if the chapter on fundamental rights were suspended, the affected citizen can have his rights as per the procedure in the common law of the U.K., prevalent before the Indian Constitution came into force.
Again, the court missed an opportunity to develop human rights jurisprudence when it allowed an initial claim for Rs. 3,990 crores to be scaled down to Rs. 715 crores in the Bhopal gas leak case.
The same is true of the majority judgment in the Mandal case which breathed a new life into an anachronistic caste system, fracturing the Indian society right from village upwards. The Supreme Court chose to interpret the term ``class'' in Art. 15 as caste - something that Ambedkar detested.
The Supreme Court was ready to admit in several rulings that it was not infallible. Judges decide, it has been said, by their conception of what ought to be the law. That conception will be determined by what William James called their sense of the ``total push and pressure of the cosmos.'' We may try to see things, said Cordozo, as objectively as we please. Nonetheless, we can never see them with any eyes except our own.
Only great judges such as Justice Holmes of the U.S. are able in rare instances to transcend the limitations of their experience and see the issues in a wider perspective.
The malady afflicting the courts in India concerns delay. It is unacceptable that a normal civil dispute should take 25 years to reach finality. Again, access to the courts is easier for the affluent classes and practically impossible for the have-nots unless they group together.
There can be no pride in accumulating litigation with enormous powers in the court if there is no finality in disposal. Delay defeats justice. There is no reason why the Supreme Court should hear all and sundry disputes without confining itself to matters concerning constitutional questions. There should be a separate appellate court to dispose of disputes not involving interpretation of the constitution.
A suggestion was made 25 years ago, that there should be benches of the Supreme Court in at least one of the Southern States. A Bench at Chennai will bring the court closer to those who see the present dispensation as remote. After all, the Madras High Court is one of the three oldest courts in the country and has sufficient infrastructure. It is also necessary that appointments to the Bench be made on merit. Prof. Laski even went to the extent of suggesting that no member of a Government in office such as the Advocate-General, the Government pleader and the Attorney General should ever be appointed to a judicial post since they can carry the prejudices of the office to the Bench. Again, once a person has attained judicial rank, he should be declared ineligible for political office. The court itself should encourage the alternative dispute resolution mechanism and make the Arbitration Act more vibrant.
Ultimately, the success or failure of any institution, be it the executive, the legislature or the judiciary will be tested on the touchstone of what that institution means to the illiterate, poverty-stricken masses of India.
T. C. A. RAMANUJAM
T. C. A. SANGEETHA
