
AHMEDABAD, JAN. 2. On Christmas Day evening, one could count at least eight Santa Clauses dancing in the vicinity of the C.G.Road/Ashram Road in the business district of Ahmedabad. The city was fully alive to the commercial potential of the Christian festival; decorations and lights put up by business establishments were in abundance, and conveyed the impression of traditional peace and goodwill.
Just about the same time, a posse of Ahmedabad policemen decided to keep a close watch on the St. Xavier Loyola Complex, where the Jesuit fraternity had put up a crib which was being visited by a large number of people. The presence of a large number of Ahmedabadis was conventional; the police vigil was not. What was decidedly unconventional was the decision of the overzealous local police inspector to question Father Cedric Prakash about the number of people coming and going.
A livid Father Prakash wanted to know why somebody, representing the authoritative face of the Gujarat Government, was interested in keeping count on people attending the Christian festivities while no similar count was known to be taken at a mosque, temple or gurudwara. For the leadership of the Christian community the police inspector's pro-activism could not possibly be seen in isolation from what was happening - or was allowed to happen - in the Dangs, which last year saw a lot of anti-Christian violence, and where this year Christmas could be celebrated ``peacefully'' only because of the presence of a very large police force and a strong media contingent.
Just extra-precaution?
For the Government, the visit of the police posse to the Loyola Complex was just an act of extra precaution. Nothing more, nothing less. In fact, when the State Home Minister, Mr. Haren Pandya, called on Father Prakash late in the evening to wish him ``Merry Christmas'', he got a mouthful about the police inquisitiveness.
A somewhat perplexed Home Minister summoned the inspector to demand an explanation, and got an equally puzzling reply that the local police station was just getting itself armed with the requisite information to respond to the Government's anticipated query as to how many people had joined in the Christmas celebration.
If pressed a bit further, the inspector could probably have written the Government's Information Department press note on the ``traditional fervour and gaiety that marked the Christmas celebration in Gujarat''. Whether the police inquisitiveness at the Loyola Complex was a micro-aberration or part of a larger mindset, the incident simply underlines the extraordinary disquiet that has come to grip the Christian community since the BJP came to power in Gandhinagar in March 1998.
The anti-Christian violence in the Dangs around Christmas last year has soured the Hindu-Christian relationship, an equation that all these years was characterised by trust and mutual respect and by a virtual absence of any organised animosity.
``What has been happening in the Dangs is only the tip of the iceberg,'' asserts Father Prakash. On the other hand, Mr. Haren Pandya argues that ``last year there was violence in the Dangs, hence so much attention was paid this year; there was no violence this time, and I am sure there will be no trouble and no media attention next year.''
These diametrically opposite perceptions reveal the difficult task before the BJP regime as it tries to live up to its constitutional obligation to protect the life and liberty of all, irrespective of religion.
Provocation forethought
Notwithstanding Mr. Pandya's tone of self-congratulation over the peaceful denouement of the `Dharma Sabha' on Christmas Day in Ahwa, there is no getting away from the fact that the Government showed itself to be less than fully mindful of its constitutional duty.
The decision of one Vidyashanker Bharatiya Maharaj, a newly- minted Jagadguru Shankaracharya of Karwarpeeth (nobody in Ahmedabad and Gandhinagar was able to attest to the veracity of the `peeth' of this Shankaracharya) to hold a Dharma Sabha in Ahwa, the site of anti-Christian violence last year, was provocation forethought. For any Government to permit such a congregation was a cowardly way out of its clear and obvious constitutional responsibility.
Nor does the peacefulness of the `Dharma Sabha' dilute the resulting ambience of provocation and intimidation. The reverberations are felt beyond the Dangs. The whole of South Gujarat, where assorted Christian missionaries have worked for decades, is today in the grip of an inexplicable unease. These decades of dedicated and sincere efforts in the areas of health, education and general empowerment of adivasis and dalits have been forgotten, and the bogey of ``conversion'' is being raised, with an aggressiveness that comes easily if there happens to be a saffronite regime in place in Gandhinagar. The argument is that since a ``Hindu party'' is in power, Hindu sentiments and preferences ought to be respected.
Hence, also, the insistence on the right to ``re- convert'' the apostate back into the fold. ``For all these years the Christian missionaries were not challenged; nobody from the Hindu side was bothered about the adivasis. This Swami Ashimananda (of the RSS- frontal organisation, Vanvasi Kalyan Parishad) has joined the battle for the adivasis' attention and faith. Hence all this hue and cry from the Christian missionaries,'' argues Mr. Kishore Makawana, editor of Sadhana, the RSS organ in Gujarati.
It is in this larger context that the equations at the micro- level become especially exacting as far as the minorities are concerned. ``False cases are being registered (against Christians) for alluring adivasis into conversion; the village jamadar, policeman, MLA, etc. use the law to harass the Christian activists,'' says Mr. Sureshbhai Chaudhry of Songarh (in Surat district), a social activist associated with the South Gujarat Vikas Sansthan.
``What is more, the taluka-level officials tell the aggrieved individuals not to take their grievance to a higher level,'' he adds. In practical terms this attitude can - and does - mean intimidation and helplessness.
The most disquieting aspect is that a section of the bureaucracy at the highest level in Gandhinagar has come to subscribe to the Hindutva point of view. In this perspective, the onus is on the minorities not to give any offence to the majority community. This is the beginning of much trouble ahead.
