
NEW DELHI, JAN. 4. The formidable Petroleum Sports Control Board (PSCB) will be looking forward to a sweep of team championships as well as five individual titles at stake in the Sahara- sponsored 61st National table tennis championship, to be played at Lucknow from January 6 to 12.
According to the groupings announced by the Table Tennis Federation of India's Technical Committee Chairman, Mr. Dhanraj Choudhary and Classification Committee Chairman, Mr. Hukum Singh, here on Tuesday, holders PSCB men and Railways women have been given top billing in the team events.
Though the PSCB's men's team has remained unchanged since the last edition held in Chennai, the women's finalists Railways and Bengal no longer have the same combination. Though Anindita Chakraborty and Kasturi Chakraborty are still around to assist Railways, Mantu Ghosh has joined PSCB. Similarly, defending champion Poulomi Ghatak and Mouma Das, who helped Bengal reach the final last year, along with Tamil Nadu's N. R. Indu, will also be turning out for PSCB.
Like last year, the singles events will be held on league-cum- knockout basis but with a difference. This time, the top eight seeds in each section will not be required to figure in the league phase and have been given byes into the second round.
lThe groupings: Men: Group `A': Petroleum Sports Control Board, Gujarat, Karnataka, Rajasthan, Himachal Pradesh and Jammu and Kashmir; Group `B': Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra `A', Chandigarh, Orissa and Goa; Group `C': Railways, Punjab, Assam, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar and Manipur; Group `D': Tamil Nadu, Delhi, Maharashtra, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh and Haryana.
Women: Group `A': Railways, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra `B', Rajasthan, Gujarat and Himachal Pradesh; Group `B': Bengal, Assam, Chandigarh, Andhra Pradesh, Haryana and Pondicherry; Group `C': Petroleum Sports Control Board, Delhi, Uttar Pradesh, Kerala, Manipur and Orissa; Group `D': Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra `A', Karnataka, Punjab, Bihar and Jammu and Kashmir.
The seedings:
Men: 1. Chetan Baboor (PSCB), 2. Arjun Dutta (PSCB), 3. S. Raman (PSCB), 4. Shivaji Dutta (Rlys), 5. Arup Basak, 6. Bhushan Thakur (Rlys), 7. Soumyadeep Roy (PSCB Academy), 8. Subhajit Saha (Sr.) (Bengal).
Women: 1. Mouma Das (PSCB), 2. Poulomi Ghatak (PSCB), 3. N. R. Indu (PSCB), 4. Anindita Chakraborty (Rlys), 5. Mantu Ghosh (Rlys), 6. M. S. Mythili (PSCB), 7. Kasturi Chakraborty (Rlys), 8. T. Pradeepa (Tamil Nadu).
