
COLLECTING UNUSUAL things is a pastime for some. If the collector has a trove of pictorial calendars, what better time to show them off than the New Year festive period, when people are at their attentive best.
A yen for the unusual has led Mr. K. Ramakrishnan, an employee at the Patent Office, to scout for old pictorial calendars, a variant on stamp collectors.
Dismissed by some as a maverick, he says he has managed to set up a collection of 10,000 to 12,000 calendars. He is now a familiar face among the `raddiwalas' and the different companies he frequents, to dig for calendars. Some of the oldest calendars date back to 1931. Mr. Ramakrishnan began his `operation collection' in 1995 though he wanted to kick off his quest for calenders even earlier.
More than 80 per cent of his collection are Indian calendars, 30 per cent of which portray Indian Gods and Goddesses.
Another 30 per cent form pictures or illustrations of landscapes and nature - flora and fauna. The rest are usually photographs of models, some art form or other, computer graphics, landmarks, men and women, antiques and others.
He has a good number of overseas calendars too from countries such as the U.K., the U.S., New Zealand, Australia, Japan, Germany, Sweden, France, Korea, a couple of African countries and some from the Middle East.
The big problem that bedevils the hobbyist is storing the collection. The collected pieces have to be first sprayed with pesticides and placed in covers before being put in the racks. Each being of different size and shape, sorting them out is itself a demanding task.
The artists who toiled to prepare the illustrations on the calendars are not given their due recognition, the collector laments. ``Nobody perhaps know the name of Raja Ravi Varma, who pioneered the advent of Indian Art into calendars. Even today, S.M. Pandits and Mr. V.K. Baraskars are not known names,'' he adds. The hobby is time consuming, yet the ``fascination is absorbing, fulfilling and demanding.'' Most of his leisure time is spent towards it. What made him take it up as a vocation? Well, it is a different type of a hobby and economic too, he smiles.
In future, he plans to either organise exhibitions of his collections, attempt to get into the Guinness Book or create a permanent gallery.
(By Saptharshi Bhattacharya)
