
EACH TIME I return to India after an interval of 6-12 months, I am surprised by the visible signs of progress. But when I recall conditions in India at the time of my first visit nearly 30 years ago, the contrast is astonishing. Changes that are so dramatic to me are largely lost on my Indian friends and associates for one of several reasons - either because they were too young to recall how things used to be or because the changes come so gradually that they take them for granted or because they compare India today with more economically advanced nations, rather than with what it used to be.
I can recall a time when it took three days to get a phone call through from India to the U.S. and sometimes half a day to get one through across Delhi, when the national highways were glorified village roads, when an Indian razor blade was more apt to remove the skin than the beard, when rice-milling and starch- making were the major industries in many districts, when choosing which car to buy was a simple question of large or small and many of them needed their engines rebuilt within three months of purchase, when bus travel from the village to the city was considered a once-in-a-lifetime thrill, when there were fewer medical shops in a district than there are sugar mills today, when TVs and refrigerators were only for the rich, when the loin cloth was the standard dress among villagers, when concrete houses were rare in most villages, when one meal a day was standard fare for many and tea and coffee were considered delicacies.
By contrast, today I feel frustrated if a call back home to America does not go through the first time I dial. STD booths have become as common as tea stalls used to be. Computer training schools are ubiquitous and it seems that every fourth student I meet is studying computer and planning to work overseas. It is rare today to find a villager who does not wear a clean shirt when he is not working on the field. Three meals a day along with tea or coffee, curd and sweets have become the norm for most people. A burgeoning variety of Indian cars, motorscooters and electronic goods are being exported to the West. As many buses ply between Pondicherry and Chennai every hour as used to go in a day.
These observations give rise to some questions: Where has all this prosperity come from? How has it been created? What factors are responsible? I have read and heard all the standard answers without finding any of them satisfying. The Government, the five- year plans, foreign technology and investment, liberalisation and several other factors claim credit for India's progress, but I am not convinced. Sure, the Government has done a lot. Without it the Green Revolution might not have come to India. But it is not the Government that has raised foodgrain production from 50 million tonnes to 200 million tonnes, it is the farmers. Sure, the induction of modern technology has contributed to industrial growth, but who or what made the induction and adoption of that technology possible?
This process of deduction leaves money as the most eligible claimant for the throne. But I find that suggestion amusing. Foreign investment has very little claim to fame, since the sum total of it all over the past five decades probably amounts to less than one per cent of the total investment. In fact, I am unable to fathom why India should need any foreign investment at all, when it possesses enough wealth in the form of gold - more than $250-billion worth - to build power plants, modern roads, first rate schools, and everything else it needs several times over. India has all the money it needs, but what seems missing is the confidence and the will to invest it.
My own conviction is that neither the Government nor the technology or any other economic factor is sufficient to explain what is going on in India today or what will happen in the future. The real source of India's impressive achievements and the key to its future greatness is human choice. It is the choice of people that makes a society prosperous, and today more and more Indians are making the right choice.
Looking back on my own country I have come to the same conclusion. Contrary to popular conception, the U.S. was not a prosperous nation for a long time. At the turn of the 20th century, hairpins, bicycles, horse-shoes and the horse and buggy were the basis of the American economy. There were only 8,000 cars and 10 miles of concrete road in the entire country. Life expectancy was less than 50 years. Typhoid and malaria were rampant. Telephones were a rarity. American homes and factories were lit by candles, lanterns and coal oil lamps. One power plant producing 5000 hp was the sole source of electricity for 76 million people.
What happened? The American people decided they wanted more. Around the turn of the century there was a marked change in people's attitudes. Until then it had been common for people to compare their standard of living with what pertained in the past. By that standard of comparison the average person in 1900 seemed far richer in comforts and conveniences than George Washington, wealthiest American of his own generation 120 years before. Instead, the average person began comparing his present state with that of the wealthiest person of his own generation and found himself wanting. The ordinary American decided that he wanted as many conveniences as the benefits of modern technology could place at his disposal and he was willing to work as long and as hard as necessary in order to get them.
Traditional economics states that societies become wealthy because human beings increase their productivity, earn more and, therefore, are able to consume and enjoy more. But I have serious doubts about this hypothesis. I have seen too many people in both America and India who, when faced with abundant opportunities to learn, produce and earn more, are simply not interested or willing for the effort. I have also seen countless instances in both countries of people who had the desire to consume and the willingness to work, but not the means, and yet were able, through ingenuity and resourcefulness, to produce and consume more.
The human choice is primary, the means of satisfying it secondary. The power of human choice is dramatically demonstrated by the Indian freedom movement. It was not the power of arms or revolution that drove the British out of the country. It was the power of choice.
Imperialism gave way to democracy. Freedom of choice is guaranteed by the Constitution and the laws of the land. But that does not mean everyone exercise that freedom or that they exercise it at the highest level for their own interests. The Government guarantees every child the right to education, but not all parents choose to send their children to school, not every child chooses to study hard, and not every student who studies chooses to think for himself or herself, which is the greatest benefit of education. Real education of the mind increases the range and quality of human choices, because it makes people aware of the opportunities for advancement and it releases greater aspiration for individual progress.
India's market economy provides people with a wide range of opportunities for employment. Until recently, most liberal arts graduates sought jobs in Government and most engineering graduates chose the security of salaried jobs over opportunities for self-employment. Now the balance is shifting in favour of jobs in private industry and entrepreneurship. Until recently, many Indian consumers were willing to settle for substandard products and poor service. Now the consumer is more discriminating and more demanding. These choices are not just the results of increasing prosperity, they are the cause.
Many of the elder generation in India who participated in the freedom struggle may not agree that the choices of youth these days are really a sign of progress. They can recall a time when patriotism, public service and self-sacrifice were the guiding ideals of society. By comparison the pursuit of profit, higher salaries and more conspicuous consumption appear selfish and degrading. This view is understandable and partially true. The idealism of selfless service may be the greatest goal that any society can pursue, but few societies are able to sustain such lofty goals, except under conditions when an enemy or natural calamity threatens society's survival and way of life.
Conditions today are different. Let us not rush to condemn today's youth. They are India's future heroes. The war against an external enemy or foreign power can be waged on a common front by a portion of the population sacrificing itself for the good of the collective. But the war against poverty has to be fought by every Indian citizen in his or her own life. The choice needed today is not for mass boycott or protest. It is for initiative and accomplishment.
GARRY JACOBS
