
CHENNAI, JAN. 4. In what seems to be a curious `desi' version of the famous `Peter Principle' - of members of an organisation liberally helping themselves with multiple posts which go beyond their managing capacity - the DMK in Tamil Nadu has come to see more bane than boon, prompting it to act tough to remedy the inner-party situation.
Confronted with a serious problem of party bigwigs at the District and Panchayat Union levels cornering several posts in Government and related bodies such as District Cooperative Banks and Milk Cooperatives, the DMK has decided on a hard option to ensure a balance by directing such multiple official posts- holders to quit all but one of them, before filing their nominations for party posts in the ongoing organisational election.
Short of implementing the `one-man one-post norm', the DMK president, Mr. M. Karunanidhi, and its general secretary, Mr. K. Anbazhagan, have now decided that activists and functionaries contesting for the posts of secretary or deputy secretary for party units from the ward-level upwards to the district, panchayat union, town and city units, could at best hold one post in any Government or related organisation.
Mr. Anbazhagan, in a clarification to his earlier statement on the issue, said today that the nominations of those partymen, who failed to conform to its latest directive for the above mentioned party posts, would be rejected by the DMK's headquarters.
While this ``bold move'' by the DMK would take care of the long- standing loyalties of the senior partymen at the District and Panchayat Union levels - where the multiple posts problem is acute - sources said the decision would also help spread the other official slots more evenly amongst the cadres, who resented ``domination'' of most official posts by a single individual.
``The cadres will be happy'' as more partymen, who were not holding party posts, would get an opportunity to man official or related posts, sources said, adding, in one case the party's top leadership discovered that a district functionary was holding on to as many as eight other non-party posts.
Such unwieldy office-bearership also reflected upon their performance vis-a-vis party work, even as enlarging the circle of entitlements by restricting district/panchayat union party functionaries to just one post in the Government would boost the morale of partymen in the context of the 2001 Assembly polls, the sources said.
Though Mr. Karunanidhi after the recent general council meeting of the DMK had said that he was leaving the issue of `one man one post' to the respective individuals, the party leadership has now hit upon a middle path, which in restructuring, avoids the pitfalls of implementing an unrealistic norm.
Meanwhile, the DMK's Administrative Committee meeting in Chennai scheduled for January 8, is to discuss the party's nominee for the coming Rajya Sabha election from Tamil Nadu. Speculations are rife in political circles that the DMK may give the other seat to the TRC leader, Mr. Vazhapadi K. Ramamurthy.
