
What were the most distinguishing developments in the recent past that have either redefined or have the potential to alter the Indian financial scene forever? Obviously questions of that genre, asked so frequently at the start of the new century, should have specific reference points and timeframes, without which a lot of trivia would emerge. A general review of the 100 years gone by or a specific attempt to spot the towering personality during that period serves little purpose because it involves a comparison of the non-comparables as well as a lot of subjectivity.
Hence, one has to look at the recent past, say the last five years to debate the relative importance of developments in the financial sector. And the only way to do this is to judge them by their full import. Are they enduring? Do they impart long-term benefits on the financial system? And so on. In other words, it is not the hype but their more enduring significance that matters.
A number of events, innovations, even regulatory and legal enactments have changed the financial system in India. The list is lengthy, but even picking and choosing a few serves the purpose. It can re-establish the premise that the most glittering of financial innovations or events have their flip side.
Technology, a dominant force
For example, high up on anyone's list of achievements will be the increasing adaptation of technology to the needs of the financial sector. The effects of that marriage are there for all to see. And not only by the select few having access to Internet banking or even the larger number using ATMs. Significant developments such as demat trading would not have been possible without the application of new technology.
Just as demat has significantly altered the share business, there have been other technology driven developments that are changing the contours of many other facets of the finance business. Mutual funds would not have been able to so effectively compete with banks for deposits with their lean set up if they had not latched on to technology from the beginning. There can be any number of other instances to show the benefits of technology. Over time structural changes in the country's banking system such as a reduction in transaction costs can come about only through increasing use of technology.
Yet, technology's beneficial role is often overstated to the point of undermining it. As usual the villain of the piece is the hype surrounding a particular technology - application. When the new private banks were launched, a lot was expected from them because, in contrast to the older banks they were ``sold'' as being technology-driven. The naive belief that investment in technology can always lead to superior bank performance has been proved wrong in a short span. Note the speed at which these banks are changing hands or otherwise altering their equity structure. And considering their short innings, their NPA levels are as worrying as those in the much older but less-technology focussed banks.
Stock index and insurance reform
Also, anyone using an ATM card of these banks will tell you that it can become a chore. One bank has issued two cards, only one of which can be used at a particular location. Unless one remembers the details, there is no alternative to carrying both the cards each time. At a fully computerised branch of the country's biggest bank, the computer prints the accounts statements promptly. But the human element and or the post office ensures that the statements arrive late. As usual. The moral of the story: there cannot be a ``stand-alone'' encomium to the technological achievements of the financial sector.
In a similar vein two other noteworthy recent developments of the financial sector can be interpreted. The first is the rise in the Sensex. At the close of the year the index had once again crossed 5,000.
The first time it did there was an euphoria that was entirely predictable. Stock indices movements, however spectacular, cannot even be correlated to the general state of the capital market leave alone that of the economy. There are too many imperfections in the markets and in the linkages among them. Beyond narrow limits economic policy can neither guide the stock markets nor rely on them for inputs. More pointedly, hazarding a guess on the stock index levels over the next few weeks or months seems futile. In 1992 there were some who predicted a sensex level of 10,000 within the next 12 months.
Lastly, the passage of the IRDA bill this year is no doubt an achievement. At long last insurance opening up is a reality in the sense that the regulators' role is now legally ordained. However the process of opening up has just begun. It took six years to cross the first hurdle - the regulatory empowerment. More difficult tasks that go towards an orderly reform of the sector lie ahead.
There is a feeling that the passage of the bill is an end in itself. It obviously is not. And the way certain key provisions of the Malhotra committee as well as in the earlier versions of the bill were altered, the prognosis is not all that bright.
For instance, the provisions regarding foreign ownership have been considerably tightened to placate influential sections opposed to the original bill. But some joint ventures have opted out on that score alone.
All the three developments are eye-catching and make for sensational news. Unless they are placed in their perspective, their true worth will be diluted.There can be no awards for the most significant achievements of the financial sector because that would contribute to self-defeating hype.
