
ISLAMABAD, JAN. 3. The three militants released by India to secure the freedom of hostages on board the hijacked Indian Airlines aircraft are expected to come to Muzaffarabad (Pakistan- Occupied Kashmir), a spokesman for the Harkat-ul-Mujahideen was quoted as telling the Dawn newspaper today.
``God willing, they (the released Kashmiri freedom fighters) will come here,'' a Harkat spokesman, Sajjad Shahid, was quoted as saying, adding that the ``freedom fighters'' were still in Afghanistan.
The newspaper reported from Muzaffarabad that two office-bearers of the Al-Omar Mujahideen had gone to Afghanistan to ``receive'' Mushtaq Ahmed Zargar alias Latram, one-time boss of Al-Omar, who was among the three released by the Government of India. An Al- Omar spokesman maintained that Naeem-ul-Haq, acting chief of the group, and Latif-ul-Haq had gone to Afghanistan to receive Zargar, a militant active in Srinagar during the early years of militancy in Kashmir.
There were conflicting reports on whether or not Masood Azhar, the cleric who was also released, had telephoned his family or not. The Associated Press claimed in an Islamabad- datelined report that Masood had telephoned his family from Kandahar late on Friday, the day the hijacking ended.
However, Masood's father, Allah Buksh, told The Hindu on telephone from Bahawalpur in Pakistan's Punjab province that the militant had not yet contacted the family. ``Koi telephone nahin aaya'' (we have not received any call), Masood's father claimed. The militant's father was, however, hopeful that his son would return soon. By all accounts, Masood Azhar appears to be a charismatic cleric with quite a following. Though only 31 years old, Azhar was an ideologue for several militant groups. He was said to be instrumental in securing the merger of three groups - Harkat-ul-Mujahideen, Harkat-i-Jihad-Islami and Al-Omar Mujahideen - to form the Harkat-ul-Ansar.
Azhar, who studied at Karachi's Jamia Uloom-i-Islamia, Binori town, edited a journal Sada-i-Mujahid before being arrested in Kashmir in 1994. Apparently, he was still writing for another Karachi-based journal from his cell in the Jammu jail.
Clearly, Azhar was considered a big enough fish for his colleagues to launch a major operation such as the hijacking of the IA aircraft.
The third militant who was released, a Pakistani-born British national, Ahmed Umar Saeed Sheikh, also belongs to the Harkat, information available here suggested.
