
IT WAS a festival of lights, an electronic Diwali, on New Year' eve, as the city lit up the night.
Revellers called the shots, as traffic turned a free-for-all towards midnight, in spite of the presence of police at some places in the city.
Action started only late in the night, even as revellers flooded cinema halls and glimmering restaurants. Long queues for dinner buffets with premium price tags, waited patiently for their turn at the dining table.
At most places, it was dinner with a theme. While at Hotel Residency, T.Nagar, it was `Great Ball of China' (Chinese food served by service staff attired in Chinese style), `Global Millennia' that served a global mix of cultures and food and the coffee shop that was converted to a Punjabi `dhaba'. ``We had a total capacity of 400 people and all tables were booked,'' says Mr. P. R. Srinivasan, Food and Beverage Manager of the hotel.
At Hotel GRT Grand Days, families waited for their turn. ``It's amazing. The buffet costs around Rs. 700 and look at the crowd. In 10 years in the industry, I haven't seen a turn out such as this on New Year's eve,'' Mr. Lyndon D'Silva, Sales Manager asserts.
The hotel's theme party for the night, `Space Odyssey' with an entry charge of Rs. 5000, was jampacked, as party animals bumped into `aliens' that glowed in the dark. John Britto's bunch of `aliens' danced with magic wands in their hands. A few minutes before the New Year's eve, an `alien' egg shell burst, and an `alien' popped out, only to boogie- woogie with the revellers, at the stroke of midnight.
Almost every hotel in the city had `private' parties organised, with special activities for the children and teenagers. At Hotel Atlantic, it was a party hosted by a prominent businessman, under the banner Mass Millennium Momentum (MMM). The theme of the party, was ``human solidarity'' against terrorism and other challenges of the millennium.The discos in the city, jammed with music and `spirits', in most cases the liquor given away ``on the house.'' Not exactly, for it was all met as `cover charge.'
Even as flashy cars and trendy bikes raced past the Marina and Besant Nagar beaches, traffic at the New Mahabalipuram road was at its peak, with revellers heading for beach parties.
The `Pirate' party at EC 41, the `Caribbean' party at Fisherman's Cove, the `Time Machine' party at MGM resorts were among the popular destinations for hot-steppers, who danced throughout the night, and greeted the first sunrise of the millennium by the beach.
Teetotallers had their share of the fun too. At Kishkinta, it was all fireworks, rides and games, for the young and the young at heart, besides 20 straw roofed millennium huts for an exclusive stay, which looked like a mini-village. At Chandamama's `Kids Carnival', the festivity not only made up for the champagne, but also went on to prove that a no-spirits bash would be just as enjoyable as any other.
The `low-budget' revellers, went hopping around the popular hang- outs in the city, shifting gears from coffee to ice-cream to fruit juice. Groups of less affluent youth roamed in two-wheelers and autorickshaws, greeting all those who were out at night.
And those not bitten by the Y2K party bug, stayed at home, relishing their choice of entertainment ranging from `Live shows' including the Vijay TV's `Raju Sundaram Starnite', to the millennium celebrations around the globe beamed to their couches.
For the poor, it was life as usual, except for the crackers and balloons. At Egmore, it was business as usual for the flyover construction workers.
(By Sudhish Kamath and Saptarshi Bhattacharya).
