
HYDERABAD, JAN. 1. The Chief Minister, Mr. N. Chandrababu Naidu, said his Government would concentrate more on rural development in the new millennium. ``My officials and I along with others will be working hard to provide reliable services,'' he promised residents of Balijaguda in Hayatnagar mandal, about 30 km away, on Saturday.
He was on a `surprise' visit to the village, conveyed his new year greetings to the people, and said he wanted to spend the first day of the new millennium with them. He made a speedy trek round the village, stopped at a few houses, sat in one and spoke with the people. Later, he held a meeting at the primary school building.
Mr. Naidu said there was abundant natural resources and that they should be utilised to develop the area. ``All of you should sit together, think of methods to generate income and work,'' he said. Instead of cultivating paddy, the villagers could think of growing vegetables which would mean more income, he said.
He asked them to list out their grievances and on their demand, immediately agreed to sanction a public telephone, `pattas' to the landless in a week's time and a metal road to the village in the next three months. More pucca houses would be constructed for the weaker sections. The Government was also ready to contribute a major share in undertaking repairs to the Sri Lakshmi Narasimha Swamy temple in the village if only the locals came forward with 30 per cent of the expenditure, either financially or through shramadan.
The Chief Minister urged the villagers to send all their children to school and practise family planning. When more transformers were sought, he said the problem of low voltage would be taken care of but the villagers too should cooperate with the Government by desisting from tapping power illegally.
Mr. Naidu's next halt was at Shantinagar, a leprosy colony, where, amid cheers, he promised construction of 60 more houses, street lights, cement roads, caste certificates and ration cards to the people residing there.
At another meeting in Pedda Amberpet, the Chief Minister said many schemes were being taken up for overall progress of the State. As Rangareddy district adjoins twin cities, it would surely reap the benefits of development taking place, he felt. Mr. Naidu announced the sanction of two extra bus services, transformers, drainage and desilting of the pond to take care of drinking water needs.
When a section of people demanded Manjeera water, he said he would first study the feasibility before making any promise. The Home Minister, Mr. T. Devender Goud, the Roads and Buildings Minister, Mr. K. Vijayarama Rao, the Labour Minister, Mr. C. Krishna Yadav, the Social Welfare Minister, Mrs. K. Pushpaleela, the Hyderabad Collector, Mr. Bhanwarlal, the Rangareddy Collector, Mrs. Rani Kumudini, the SP, Mr. N. V. Surendra Babu, the MCH Commissioner, Dr. P. K. Mohanty, the HUDA Vice- Chairman, Mrs. Lakshmi Parthasarathy, the HUDA Chairman, Mr. T. Krishna Reddy, and the BJP Legislature Party leader, Mr. N. Indrasena Reddy, formed the entourage.
