
MOSCOW, JAN. 3. Russian forces are reported to have made little progress in the battle for the Chechen capital Grozny and are suffering heavy losses.
The private NTV television cited Russian military sources in Chechnya as saying that 1,500 troops had been wounded in Grozny during three weeks of the assault and were thwarted in their attempts to push for the centre of the city. The report contrasted sharply with official communiques.
Casualty figures released by the Interior Ministry 10 days ago put the number of its troops killed at 44 and wounded at 116 since the start of the operation in Chechnya on Oct. 1. The Defence Ministry said the regular army had lost 347 soldiers and 1,040 were wounded. Of the 100,000 troops fighting in Chechnya, roughly half belong to the Interior Ministry and half to the Defence Ministry, but Grozny is being stormed mainly by Interior Ministry forces.
Interior Ministry officers interviewed by NTV television dismissed as lies official reports that Russian forces had full control of Grozny's northwestern Staropromyslovsky district and pushed as far as the centre of Grozny. They admitted suffering heavy losses because of fierce resistance put up by Chechen rebels and poor coordination between troops belonging to the Defence and Interior Ministries, which led to Russian troops coming under friendly artillery fire.
Lieutenant Konstantin Kukhonovets said he alone had escaped unwounded when his platoon (about 70 troops) tried to push deeper into the Chechen capital. Another officer told NTV that ``dozens, hundreds of wounded troops'' were evacuated from Grozny every day. NTV said military hospitals around Chechnya were overflowing with wounded troops and complained that the military would not let journalists visit Grozny in an apparent effort to hide Russian losses.
A spokesman for Chechen rebels today denied a Russian report that the field commander, Mr. Arbi Barayev, was killed on Sunday. Mr. Movladi Ugugov told Radio Echo Moskvy that on Monday, Mr. Barayev led a successful counter-attack on Russian forces to recapture three Chechen villages in the mountains - Alkhan-Yurt, Alkhan- Kala and Kuary. He also claimed that in the attack, rebels had destroyed a field headquarters of the Russian commander in the area, General Vladimir Shamanov. The Russian military denied the report.
A spokesman for Russian forces in Chechnya told NTV that Federal troops had made progress in their advance on Grozny from the south and from the north-west, in Staropromyslovsky district. He said three Russian troops had been killed and one had died in hospital.
