
NEW DELHI, JAN. 3. With the Delhi Government playing spoilsport, most northern States have not switched over to the uniform minimum rates for sales tax from January 1, 2000 as was decided earlier at a meeting of Chief Ministers and State Finance Ministers. However, most of the western and southern States have already switched over, or have announced the schedule to do so.
Another area where the scheme is not being implemented is the North-East where, barring Assam, no State has moved over to the new system. The Union Territory of Pondicherry has also not switched over.
According to Dr. M.C. Purohit, Convenor of the Monitoring Committee of select State Finance Ministers who are overseeing the implementation of the agreement, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Gujarat, Maharashtra and Goa had switched over the uniform sales tax from January 1, 2000. Tamil Nadu has announced that it would change the rates from January 5. In the east, West Bengal and Assam have announced their intentions while the Orissa Government has sought some clarifications from the Monitoring Committee. Madhya Pradesh has also announced its switch-over, though no concrete information is yet available with the Monitoring Committee.
In the north, the Delhi Government's decision to put on hold the new system had resulted in most other States in the region following suit. While the Delhi Government's decision is being vetted in the Union Home Ministry and the Union Finance Ministry, Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and even Bihar have held back their decisions because of Delhi. No information is available from Himachal Pradesh.
In the North-East, Mizoram, Meghalaya, Tripura, Nagaland and Manipur have not implemented the decision. Arunachal Pradesh, incidentally, is the only State to have no local sales tax; only Central sales tax is imposed there.
The phasing out of sales tax-based incentive schemes, which was also to be implemented from the same date, has also come into effect in the States which have implemented the decision on minimum sales tax.
According to Dr. Purohit, the non- implementation of the decision by a number of States would be taken up at the next meeting of the Monitoring Committee on January 10 in New Delhi. Meanwhile, efforts would be taken to coax the left out States to follow suit.
The Committee would look into the problems faced by some States with specific items. For instance, Andhra Pradesh is reported to be facing problems with pasteurised milk while other States have also reported problems with some items.
