
LUCKNOW, JAN. 4. Demanding an increase in the development fund for legislators from Rs.50 lakhs per annum to Rs. 1 crore, the Samajwadi Party legislators trooped into the well of the Assembly on Monday forcing an adjournment of the House. However, the Chief Minister refused to make any commitment over the demand or any assurance to give a consideration.
The issue was raised by the BSP MLA, Mr. Ram Lalit Chaudhury, who complained that installation of handpumps in the rural areas, or the implementation of JRY schemes, and other rural employment- oriented, or poverty elimination schemes besides funds for development of eastern U.P. remained unspent and legislators were not being associated in the decision making process.
He also lamented that out of Rs. 50 lakhs which was to be put at the disposal of each legislator for development in their respective constituencies, only Rs. 25 lakhs was allocated in 1997-98. The balance should be allocated to the legislators. Going further, he said that the State Government should raise this amount from Rs.50 lakhs to Rs. 1 crore per annum.
Taking a cue from this, the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Dhani Ram Verma, of the Samajwadi Party made an appeal to the Government to respond to the demand for increase in development fund at the disposal of U.P. legislators. The amount was insufficient for development of a constituency and the legislators were being accused of neglecting their constituency's development by electorates.
The presiding officer, Mr. S. S. Dang, drew the attention of the treasury benches for any assurance, but no response was forthcoming. The Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Dhani Ram Verma, made persistent appeal to the Chief Minister to react to the Opposition demand, but Mr. Ram Prakash Gupta maintained a stoic silence. At this, Mr. Dhani Ram Verma asked his legislators to troop into the well of the House shouting that he would not allow the House proceedings to continue. The frantic appeals of Mr. Dang fell on deaf ears as the Opposition kept up a chant denouncing the Government. The House was then adjourned by Mr. Dang for 40 minutes. However, when the House reassembled, the Opposition did not obstruct the proceedings further. The Leader of the Opposition hoped that the Government would sympathetically consider the demand.
Earlier, the CLP leader Mr. Pramod Tiwari through a notice of propriety questioned the Chief Minister s assuming the office of the Leader of the House, when he was not an elected member of the Assembly. Mr. Gupta is not a member of either of the House. Mr. Tiwari said that since he was not a member of any of the House, he could not function as the Chief Minister and Leader of the House. He was supported by the Jagdambika Pal an unattached member.
Mr. Dang, however, ruled out the notice and pointed out that at least five times in the past, such leaders who were not member of the Assembly, were sworn in as Chief Minister of U.P. and they included leaders like C. B. Gupta, T. N. Singh, Ram Naresh Yadav, B. P. Singh and Ms. Mayawati. Any leader could be sworn in as Minister or Chief Minister even without being a member of any House, but has to get elected within six months.
