
NEW DELHI, JAN. 3. When `landing charges' in respect of imported goods are assessed by the Customs authorities at a percentage of the value of imported goods, the `landing charges' cover the totality of all that an importer expends to bring imported goods to land, the Supreme Court has ruled. A Bench of the court comprising Mr. Justice S. P. Bharucha and Mr. Justice R. C. Lahoti set aside an order made by the Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal - which added the `unloading charges' from ship to berth in respect of the value of certain imported quantities of rock phosphate and sulphur of the appellant-concern, though 1.4 per cent `landing charges' was already added to the value of the said imported goods.
According to the Tribunal, the 1.4 per cent `landing charges' already added to the value of the said goods comprised wharfage charges and conveyance charges from wharf to the transit sheds but not the unloading charges from ship to berth.
``Landing charges are exactly what the words mean, the expenditure incurred by an importer for bringing goods on board ship to land,'' and ``landing charges, in law, must be assessed on actuals, but, as a matter of practice, particularly to facilitate expeditious clearance, landing charges are assessed at a percentage of the value of the goods and such assessment is accepted,'' the Bench observed.
When so assessed, landing charges covered the totality of all that an importer expended to bring imported goods to land, the Bench added.
In the present case, the Customs authorities assessed the `landing charges' that the appellant incurred at 1.4 per cent of the CIF value of the goods. There was no objection by the appellant to this.
It was not its (appellant's) case that such percentage exceeded the costs in this behalf that they had actually incurred and that they should get a refund. Appellant's plea was that the 1.4 per cent `landing charges' represented all that they had to expend to bring the said goods to land and that, therefore, no addition of stevedoring or unloading charges could be made. The Bench in allowing an appeal from the appellant against the Tribunal's order, however, said it was open to the Customs authorities not to assess landing charges at a percentage and to assess them at actuals. But ``if they assessed them on a percentage basis, they cover thereby all aspects of landing charges and it is not open to them (Customs authorities) then to seek to add any amount thereto on the basis that this or that or the other was not covered thereby.''
