
YOUTH DEVELOPMENT and sports promotion are part of Human Resources Development and thus interlinked with many other policies and programmes making it obligatory to adopt an inter- sectoral approach to establish a Union-State coordination.
Every government assuming office at the centre, for the past one decade, has been making a rather routine announcement about adopting new youth and sports policies. The present Union Minister for Culture, Sports, and Youth Affairs has already come out with a promise to declare the two policies within 100 days of his assuming office. As the time set by him is coming to a close, the policies are likely to be proclaimed any day.
Now that a separate ministry is created to look after culture, youth affairs and sports at the cabinet rank, there seems to be a hope that the two areas may get their due share of attention commensurate with their importance for social good and nation building. However, youth development and sports promotion are part of human resources development and thus interlinked with many other policies and programmes making it obligatory to adopt inter-sectoral approach and establish union-state coordination. This vital factor cannot be ignored despite the elevation of the ministry if the much awaited policies are to prove a progress over earlier experiments.
The point that the youth policy should be accompanied with a sound children's policy, women's policy, and education policy has not lost its relevance. An integrated and well designed human resource development policy should form the base for youth and sports policies.
Thirty years of discussions have taken place on the youth policy within the concerned ministries/ departments within themselves and in consultation with non-governmental organisations working in the field ever since the reorganisation of the Ministry of Education as the Ministry of Education and Youth Services and constitution of a National Youth Board in 1969. The first National Youth Policy was adopted in 1988. A department of Sports was created in 1982 and a Sports Policy was declared in 1984 in the context of Asiad, which took place in India. Both these policy documents went a long way and became models for many other countries, but remained paper policies in many respects because of the very volume of the work involved in carrying out the policies, and lack of required resources and commitment for undertaking proper plan of action.
The policies presently contemplated should, therefore, be accompanied with a well thought out and practicable plan of action. This can best be formulated in consultation with youth organisations, youth workers and social scientists working in the area. Unfortunately, there seems to be a secrecy surrounding the policies as in the case of 200 odd national policies in force today that even policy makers are not always aware of the existence of policies. The texts of the policies are not easily available even to those directly concerned.
Rajiv Gandhi's government, whatever the intentions, did initiate some action besides adopting a youth policy. The Nehru Yuva Kendras started in 1985 were expanded to cover about 300 districts by 1987-88 and became a prominent centre of youth activity. They were placed under an autonomous body called the Nehru Yuva Kendra Sanghatan to cultivate expertise and promote better coordination between government/ non-government organisations.
The National Front government headed by V. P. Singh, which came to power in 1989 declared its intention of formulating a new youth policy giving thrust to the promotion of national unity and integrity and respect for the Constitution, and creating an awareness about the country's great historical and cultural heritage. In conformity with the over-all policy of that government, the objectives sought to be achieved through a youth policy were a sense of commitment to fight injustice and inequities in society, an aptitude for character building, a tendency to respect and tolerate dissent, and an awareness about national and international issues. A system of education based on equality and universality was also envisaged.
The policy was to contain a programme of action also with the thrust directed on rural youth. There was also a move to restructure the Nehru Yuva Kendras which by then had become principal youth centres in almost all districts. The government did not last long to claim any achievements in this field.
The next Congress government under P. V. Narasimha Rao did not evince any interest in a new youth policy. But, it made a lasting contribution by establishing the Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development (RGNIYD) as an autonomous body in 1993.
The Institute was created to serve as the apex agency for formulating youth programmes, and to act as a `think tank' for framing policies and strategies for implementation.
It has been designed to provide a forum for discussion of youth related issues, and a centre for advanced study and research on youth, and to offer hostel, auditorium, sports facilities and a crafts centre for participants in their programmes.
Situated at Sriperumbudur, about 40 kms from Chennai, in an extensive area of 40 acres, the campus presents a great hope of an institute coming up to serve as a model to many Asian countries, but remains still incomplete after six years.
It seems that a policy decision is now required to activate this institution and complete the construction as designed without allowing political considerations to intervene.The national agenda for governance of the coalition government formed in 1998 under the leadership of the BJP included an item which said, ``Our youth are the strength of the family, village, and the community; they are also the future of our nation. We will take all necessary steps to mobilise this most idealistic, inspired section of our society in the mission of nation building. For this purpose, we shall build national consensus for the creation of a National Reconstruction Corps aimed at environmental protection, ecological tasks, reclamation of wasteland, including afforestation, and for spreading literacy''.
The idea is entangled in political controversies, but not given up. Whether this will be accommodated in the youth policy or run concurrently is not clear.
It is in this background it is disclosed that the emphasis on the new youth policy would be on equipping the youth population to realise their full capabilities while the sports policy would aim at broadbasing sports activities, modernising sports infrastructure, and conducting research studies. Sporadic reports convey that the thrust areas may include youth empowerment in the sense of participation in decision-making, gender justice to ensure basic economic, social, and cultural equity to women, and information and research network to help formulation of programmes. A necessary addition to the objectives already well delineated in earlier policies relates to health information and services.
Youth policy may avoid the set pattern of a one-sided document placing the youth at the receiving end of certain rights and privileges. It must include their duties and responsibilities which must be acknowledged and discharged. For, the idea is not to create another privileged category in society, but to build a future on a sound basis. This takes us back to the point that policies pertaining to children, women, education, should all fall in line and facilitate one another and all concerned ministries should make unified efforts.
Sports policy
Besides a separate sports policy, youth policies and education policies also contain clauses on sports. Still the need to address a variety of problems from folk games to televised sports have not been met even superficially.
The Sports Policy of 1984, like a preamble to a law, recognises the need of every citizen ``to participate in and enjoy games, sports, and recreational activities'', and accordingly emphasis is on creation of sports infrastructure in villages and towns, preservation of playfields and stadia and inclusion of sports and physical education as part of the school curriculum. But, result- oriented schools are not friendly to sports promotion and house building activities encroach on playfields in addition to other problems in sports promotion.
Though a late comer in the field of modern sports, India has shown some unique achievements. Hence, any sports policy will face a difficult job of building the basic infrastructure and encouraging competitive talents and excellence - a task similar to eradicating illiteracy and promoting research at the same time. The new policy should widen its search for sports talent.
Sports is presently viewed mainly from the point of international contests for medals and not from the angle of physical and mental development or mass pleasure. In fact, sports make little impact in society beyond the viewers. The common people who play for their own pleasure make no impact in society and are likely to be ignored in the official policy. There is very little research on the psychological, ethical and social significance of sports - a gap that must be filled so that policy initiatives may be taken to elevate sports as a necessary social activity.
Active participation in sports is very little, but passive spectatorial participation receives a great deal of official attention. Newspapers also devote substantial space for sports - a welcome development from the point of their coverage, but television channels appear to be preoccupied with particular sports somewhat disproportionate to their social importance in this country.
The disadvantages of spectatorship without participation - psychological and physiological - have been brought out by many writers. Whether sitting in a stadium directly watching the game or before a television, the viewers get the thrill without an outlet to release the tension and get worked up for nothing.
Many instances of spectator violence in protest against the umpire's decision or the defeat of their national team have been reported, which shows the dangers of excessive viewer participation. A sports researcher, writing in the western context, has observed that passiveness in sports encourage passiveness in social life and that spectators cheat themselves the true joys of sports.
In the light of this, the new policy may focus on participation and building the necessary facilities and aim at ensuring `sports for all'.
S. SARASWATHI
