
Cutting out and tearing paper is the best way to understand two dimensional shapes. Geometric shapes are basic and clear. An understanding of the way these basic shapes work together can develop a sense of composition.
Space is not limited to canvas or paper. Art can be created on large spaces, like the painted walls of village homes. Or it can be finely worked out within a small space, like miniatures.
Reflect on how best a given space can be used, not merely fill up available area. The space you choose to work on determines the nature of the work.
Cut outs
Materials
Black paper, white paper, scissors, glue.
* Cut out shapes in black paper. * Decorate the shapes further by folding and cutting in to them. * Glue these shapes on white paper. * What do they suggest? Can more features and details be added? How can the basic shapes be developed further?
Variations
* Try outlining the shapes with plain or jagged lines. * Try using newspaper or different coloured papers. * Try tearing instead of cutting shapes. * The paper need not necessarily be bright. Try combing shapes cut out of brown, black, or newspaper.
Masks
Materials
Coloured paper, white paper, felt pens, glue, scissors.
* Cut out the outline of a face on white paper. * Fold the paper in half, and cut out shapes for eyes, nose and mouth. * Glue the mask on to a coloured background. * Outline the cut-out features of the mask with felt pens, so that the shape stands out.
Variations
* Raise the contours of a cut-out mask slightly, and glue the edges on a sheet of paper to create a three-dimensional effect. * Try making animal masks.
Doing Something Big
Materials
Four sheets of brown paper, powder or poster paints, brushes, glue.
* Glue the overlapping edges of four sheets of brown paper to form a large background. * Look at the background. How can the spaces be used best? Which spaces look empty? Which need to be left empty? * Think of simple, large figures or objects to put in, keeping in mind the space available. * Once you have outlined your figures, work out the rest of your composition, on the same scale. * How is it different from usual compositions? How did you use your brush?
Miniatures
Like outsize pictures, miniatures also allow you to experiment with spaces.
Materials
Old visiting cards, black felt pen, white paper, poster paints.
* Draw small pictures or scenes on each visiting card. * Arrange them on the white paper background - either randomly or in a pattern. * Move them around, until you are happy with the composition, and then glue them on to the white paper. * Outline each of the cards with a black felt pen. * Colour the remaining spaces in the background, adding designs if you like.
Variations
* Instead of painting the background, try using coloured paper. * You can also draw miniatures directly on the background instead of using visiting cards. * Create interesting miniatures out of triangles or circles.
Vertical and Horizontal Spaces
A picture does not need to be within a rectangle. A long vertical or horizontal strip of paper breaks this convention and suggests interesting possibilities for compositions.
Materials
Long, rectangular sheet of brown paper, crayons, water colours, brushes.
* Look at the strip of paper - do you want to use it horizontally or vertically? * What kinds of associations do you have with vertical space? A tree? A building? * What about horizontal spaces? A river? A road? * Outline your composition with black paint. * Fill in details using crayons and water colours.
Variations
* Try combining vertical and horizontal spaces and working on them.
Narrative Scrolls
In many folk traditions of India, singers and storytellers narrate their tales with the help of a long painted scroll. This "illustrates" their narrative. Scrolls are a wonderful way of painting and telling a story. They use visual space uniquely.
Materials
Newspaper, black paper, poster paints, brushes, scissors, glue.
* Think of a story, song or rhyme you would like to illustrate. * Cut the newspaper into rectangles or squares. * Paint successive scenes from your story on the newspaper panels. * Cut and glue the black paper into a strip long enough to fit in all the newspaper panels. * Glue the panels successively on to the black paper scroll. * The scroll can be operated horizontally or vertically, by unrolling it scene by scene, as the story unfolds.
Variation
* Try a scroll which is painted continuously and not separated into panels.
TARIT BHATTACHARJEE
Written by
KANCHANE ARAI
GITA WOLF
