
SYDNEY, JAN. 2. The agony multiplied at the SCG as Australia inflicted grievous wounds on the Indian batting line up to maintain its supremacy in the ongoing series.
The Indian cricketers were lackadaisical and proved that they were beyond reform. If the Australians bowled well the Indians too were expected to bat well at this level. It, however, looked such a mismatch that at the end of the opening day of the third Test the situation seemed just another page from the book of India's cricketing miseries. Only one was reading it at a new venue.
India was 121 for eight when poor light stopped the one-sided contest for the day. The scoreline was all too familiar as the Indians relived some of the inglorious happenings of the last two Tests.
Brett Lee on a hat-trick was familiar; Ajit Agarkar, who could ``bat a bit'' but was out to first ball for the fourth successive time was familiar; the highly-rated middle-order collapsing in a heap was familiar; Sachin Tendulkar done in by the umpire was familiar. So what was new? The opening pair of M. S. K. Prasad and V. V. S. Laxman.
Negative attitude
The negative attitude, despite all the talk to the contrary by Tendulkar, has hardly shown the Indians as a bunch wanting to put up a good show. To have chosen to bat might appear a brave decision on surface but there was an ugly side beneath it which caused the debate on India batting first.
In taking the first strike at the Aussies the idea was obviously to avoid batting last against Shane Warne but in the process the batsmen were exposed to the fast bowlers on a helpful morning. The pitch may not have justified the pre-match hype of it being very quick but it certainly required courage to bat first despite having picked another makeshift opener.
What could have been the wisdom of trying to push someone like Mannava Prasad into such a hostile atmosphere was tough to comprehend. He was preferred to Devang Gandhi, the original choice for the slot but clearly lacking in self- confidence after landing in Australia. Prasad just about hung on as the pair fell one run short of the best opening stand of the Test series - 11 runs by S. Ramesh and Laxman. The Hyderabadi, never comfortable, took his eyes off a bouncer and got out in an ungainly manner. The Indian batsmen have looked woefully out of form and incredibly out of depth. They have failed against the experience of Glenn McGrath and the raw talent of Brett Lee, who once again hustled the batsmen with his speed. A pity Damien Fleming was not rewarded for bowling outstandingly, getting the edges but not the wickets. He should have got Rahul Dravid but Adam Gilchrist grassed the offering.
It is indeed amazing how none of the Indian batsmen, we shall keep Tendulkar out of all such discussions, has managed to come to terms with the technical requirements to put up a semblance of a fight. The bounce might have been steep but not unplayable. Some of the batsmen were set up and dismissed like club cricketers. Nothing was more depressing than watching Tendulkar alone in the middle trying to ward off the threat from the aggressive Aussies with McGrath, Fleming and Lee bowling a splendid line all along.
The Indian skipper continues to be a marked man. Not by the bowlers but the umpires and the hacking job was done by Ian Robinson from Zimbabwe this time. It is just a reflection of the shoddy umpiring standards that Tendulkar keeps getting the bad ones. Here too, he was handed down what is known as a fifty- fifty decision in cricketing parlance. The ball hit the batsman above the roll and the fact that Tendulkar was on his toes at the point of contact could not convince Mr. Robinson, who promptly upheld the shout.
Third horrendous decision in five innings only evoked a smile from the man who continues to be a sort of lone ranger in this team. And then McGrath ran up to him and said a few nice things which we shall not recognise as something which might have brought the game into disrepute. Only acts like Venkatesh Prasad's fall in that category. Tendulkar had savaged McGrath to the tune of 14 runs off five balls at that point when the Zimbabwean struck.
It presents a sad sight to see Rahul Dravid stuck in his defence syndrome and looking a shadow of the brilliant technician that we have known him as. He looks good but does not translate his time at the crease into a tall score. And he looks stunningly short of confidence, unable to decide what approach to adopt. This time he was snared by McGrath into playing away from the body.
The left-handed Sourav Ganguly is becoming a Greg Blewett bunny, becoming the bowler's first-ball victim. Today, he was cramped as the ball snapped back at him and all he could do was glide it to gully. It was a planned execution by the Aussies.
There was no point blaming Hrishikesh Kanitkar and Vijay Bharadwaj because both looked hopelessly out of place in the prevailing situation. ``I'll be happy as long as they try hard. Doesn't matter if they fail as long as they try hard,'' Tendulkar had said of all his men. At the cost of sounding harsh, one only had this conclusion at the end of the day - they lack the will and the heart, not to speak of technique in some cases.
The capacity crowd had its fill. Mark Waugh appeared in his 100th Test match while McGrath and Lee, both locals, gave them enough to cheer with their inspired assault on the opposition.
INDIA - 1st innings:
M.S.K. Prasad c M. Waugh b McGrath 5
(43m, 37b)
V.V.S. Laxman c Slater b Lee 7
(93m, 60b)
R. Dravid c Ponting b McGrath 29
(102m, 74b, 1x4)
S. Tendulkar lbw b McGrath 45
(82m, 53b, 8x4)
S. Ganguly c S. Waugh b Blewett 1
(5m, 5b)
H. Kanitkar c Gilchrist b Lee 10
(83m, 67b, 1x4)
V. Bharadwaj c Gilchrist b Lee 6
(67m, 35b, 1x4)
A. Kumble (batting) 1
(25m, 23b)
A. Agarkar c M. Waugh b Lee 0
(1m, 1b)
J. Srinath (batting) 2
(14m, 8b)
Extras (lb-11, nb-3, w-1) 15
---
Total (for 8 wkts. in 60 overs, 261m) 121
---
Fall of wickets: 1-10 (M.S.K. Prasad), 2-27 (Laxman), 3-68 (Dravid), 4-69 (Ganguly), 5-95 (Tendulkar), 6-118 (Kanitkar), 7-
119 (Bharadwaj), 8-119 (Agarkar).
Australia bowling: G. McGrath 15-6-34-3 (nb-1), D. Fleming 13-7-
24-0 (nb-2, w-1), B. Lee 17-9-25-4, S. Warne 13-4-22-0, G. Blewett 3-2-5-1.
