
THE BEST things in life come in small packages, they say. One look at the `life and works' of Tathagat Avtar Tulsi from Patna is enough to lend conviction to the adage.
He is all of 12 years old today, but his achievements are that of a lifetime.
At the age of ten, Thathagat finished his CBSE. In the next two years, as Bihar woke up to the fact that it had a child prodigy, he completed his BSc (honours) and MSc in Physics with flying colours from Patna University.
Tathagat, who was honoured with the National Child Award for Exceptional Achievement in 1997, was in Chennai recently to deliver the `Millennium address' on the occasion of the valedictory function of the National Programme for Middle School Students, organised by the St. Johns International Residential School, Palanjur. Speaking on the `Role of Students in the Next Millennium', this exemplary student told the rest of his peers gathered there what he thought they could do for the nation.
At a rapid pace, in a Bihari accent, he talks about `super conductivity', `quantum field theory', `big bang theory', particle physics and similar high sounding canons. At the moment, he says he is waiting for the Baba Atomic Research Centre to clear his application for a Ph.D in nuclear physics. Perhaps in another year, Tathagat will have another achievement tucked under his belt. ``I hope they will take me in,'' he says. By now, if you feel it is too tame an ambition for him, you are right. A Nobel Prize comes next in line.
But his loquaciousness is confined to his work. Try talking to him about his personal life and what he does when he is not pondering the mysteries of science, he is almost shy and the pace slows down. As if he is not used to talking about such things. ``I play with other children, exercise and read books,'' he says with a shy smile. Cricket is his favourite game and like most other kids, Sachin Tendulkar is his idol.
His favourite book is probably the one that he wrote at the age of 10 years, ``Electro gravity unification and energy loss phenomenon,'' but comics and other light reading material will also do fine once in a while. Even in newspapers, he looks for `development and sports news.' ``Nothing else interests me,'' he says. No, not even the news about the high profile marriage of his Chief Minister's daughter, which the rest of the nation was eagerly lapping up.
He is quite prepared for the standard questions that scribes shoot at him. What is the reason for his success? `Three to four hours of study a day and a little bit of genetic manipulation', Tathagat says emphatically.
The second of his reasons has an interesting history behind it. His father, Prof. Tulsi Narayan Prasad, an erstwhile history professor, claims to have achieved a breakthrough in the field of genetics, adding that he had plotted the genetic patterns for his son, much before his birth. But, that is another story.
(By Ramya Kannan)
