
THIS is the third part of the series on 'Salaam Bollywood' by Bhawana Somaaya.
LOOKING BACK, I think that it was the most professionally conducted interview I ever went through. Beginning with the filling of a detailed application form, one was put through a gruelling question-answer session by a panel of four intimidating judges. As I waited for my turn, I wondered what I was doing in a strange place with strange people. I thought of my parents and shuddered to think of their reaction. Money was never in excess at home, but working was never made out to be a necessity. The emphasis was always on education. Strangely, for me, the process of finding a job was far more exciting than getting the job. There was no doubt in my mind that I didn't want the job. That I wasn't writer material. My self-image was that of a hardworking, sincere and moderately talented person. My brother thought otherwise. Once, he happened to read a college tutorial that I had left on the desk and said, 'Do you know you can write? Actually write?' I didn't take his compliment seriously.
My mind clouded with all these thoughts, I walked into the sparsely furnished room for my share of interrogation. A long table covered with a white cloth, a few flower baskets and some unfriendly faces stared at me from behind the desk. Two of them didn't speak a word, the third, a turbaned gentleman dug his teeth into a tandoori chicken. This was my first exposure to undisguised non-vegetarian food and I felt nauseous. The fourth, the spokesman (a grey-eyed man) looked at me icily and said, 'I'm Mohan Bawa' I drew a blank. 'I'm a senior journalist,' he continued, 'Don't you read film magazines?' I shook my head. 'Then what are you doing here? We're hiring film journalists for a new magazine.' I knew this wasn't going to be easy. Scared as I was, I told grey-eyed Bawa that I knew nothing about film magazines. Had never seen or read one and nobody in the family was even remotely connected to any kind of journalism. Only a daily newspaper, Readers Digest and Life magazine came home because my older siblings read them. Attached to KEM hospital as medical social workers, my choice in reading and films was influenced by them. An old friend in school purchased Stardust regularly and once or twice tried to educate me about their saucy style of writing but because I wasn't a regular reader I couldn't follow the bites and the barbs. I guess I wasn't sufficiently interested. Considering the limited pocket-money one was given, indulging in film magazines wasn't a priority.
Bawa wasn't impressed and there was an awkward silence as I picked up my bag to leave. I was almost at the door when, on second thoughts, he asked me to come back. He suggested that I sit in the adjoining room and list out ten questions I'd like to ask my favourite star. I did what was told. Next, he asked me to jot down imaginary answers to the questions. Looking back I feel it was a dangerous precedent to set to a debutant journalist. That's when the rot sets in. The unsuspecting fresher surrenders to the technique and over the years, nurses less and less guilt about spicing up a dull copy. My second lesson in journalism was: Don't succumb to rules you don't believe in. With time, I learnt that different editors had different methods of hiring staff. When I became one myself, I relied on my instincts! How did they introduce themselves, their body language and eye contact, what books had they read.... It always helps when applicants carry clippings of their writings.
When I handed my answer sheet to Bawa, he had one look at it and said, 'You are hired on a salary of Rs. 500 a month.' I quickly calculated that this was a far better deal than the sunlit garage with broken cups, but better sense prevailed and I said, 'No, I don't want to be a film journalist.' By now Bawa had enough of my tantrums. 'Don't want to be a film journalist?' Then what the hell are you doing here wasting everybody's time? Shocked at him hollering, the turbaned gentleman, who had by now finished with his tandoori chicken, rose to my defence. 'Maybe you should think about it and get back to us tomorrow,' he said gently. The tone was reassuring even if it was a face I didn't completely trust. I didn't get back to them, in fact, forgot all about it until the following day when they phoned. The voice introduced himself as 'Kohli', said that he was leaving for Delhi the following week and needed to confirm their Mumbai representative. He wanted to know if I had made up my mind. I had. I didn't want the job.
(To be continued)
Correction: Queen Elizabeth I was the Virgin Queen and not as mentioned in the article ``Tales that statues tell'' published on December 27. The statue outside Government Estate is that of Edward VII and not George V.
