
MUMBAI, JAN. 2. With a revival in most segments of the manufacturing sector, industries that provide vital inputs to these are also looking up. The specialty chemicals industry is a case in point. After a lull of about three years, its fortunes have been on the rise. It caters to sectors such as textiles, paper and leather besides rubber and paints among varied applications in a large number of other sectors.
Following the outcry regarding pollution resulting from the manufacture of dyes, dyestuffs and pigments (specialty chemicals) in the West a couple of years ago, there has been a shifting of global capacities for both production and consumption of intermediates to the Asian region. This is expected to further fuel high growth rates in specialty chemicals here. Also, companies are expected to benefit from the introduction of new specialty chemicals such as super plasticisers and dispersions for the paper industry.
The textiles and leather industries had been going through a contraction in demand but are expected to see improved rates of growth in the short to medium term. The increased environmental consciousness is also expected to influence high growth rates for water-soluble metal complex dyes.
The industry per se is fragmented and is characterised by a large number of smaller players in the unorganised sector. The organised sector is dominated by multinational companies which have strong links with their parents though a few local producers such as Hindustan Organic Chemicals and Balmer Lawrie have also been significant players. The thrust on quality is also helping the larger players. The large players in this industry include Clariant (India), Colour Chem, BASF and Ciba Specialty Chemicals. There has been, of late strict enforcement of anti-pollution laws and a lowering of import duties.
Clariant (India) is the Indian subsidiary of Swiss Clariant International. It is the largest player in textile chemicals and leather dyes in country with a high end segment of textiles, leather, paper, paint and coating industries. The company has consciously avoided the high volume low margin products and has gone in for production innovation and customer support.
It is a top player in the textile and leather chemicals segment and these account for 27 and 24 per cent of the total revenue respectively. The company has had a steady thrust for exports - it accounted for 35 per cent of turnover and was at Rs. 76 crores out of a turnover of Rs. 241 crores in 1998-99. For the six months ended September 1999, the turnover was up 1.5 per cent to Rs. 115.75 crores, while the post tax earnings was up to Rs. 7.23 crores.
Ciba Specialty Chemicals (India) was formed when the chemicals division of Hindustan Ciba Geigy was hived off following the global merger of the parent Ciba Geigy with Sandoz forming Novartis in 1997. It has a presence in additives, performance polymers, consumer care and pigments. It has optical brightener and anti-oxidant plants in Goa. The other products are sourced from its parent and group companies. The brand `Tinopal' is a popular optical brightener. It also markets `Araldite' adhesives. The consumer care business - optical brightening agents, finishing agents and other chemicals cater to textiles, leather, paper, detergents and cosmetics.
The company has a number of joint ventures in place. It transferred its domestic pigments and textile dyes business to a 50:50 joint venture with Indian Dyestuff Industries in 1998.
The research activity conducted by CSCI was also transferred to its 100 per cent subsidiary Ciba India Pvt. Ltd. (CIPL) which has entered into a joint venture with Tamilnadu Petroproducts for manufacture of Araldite range of adhesives with a capacity of 30,000 tonnes per annum.
Colour-Chem is in the midst of major restructuring. Its successfully completed its voluntary retirement scheme and this has helped to cut costs. The company has a significant presence in fine chemicals (40 per cent of turnover), pigments and additives (30 per cent of turnover) and leather chemicals (16 per cent of turnover).
A small part of the turnover comes from laminating adhesives and polymer dispersions. It caters to a range of industries including pesticides, paints, plastics, printing inks, leather and FMCGs. It also manufactures `Mowlith' emulsions at its Roha factory in collaboration with its parent.
In 1997, the company exited from textile chemicals and dyes following Hoechst AG's exiting the textile business globally. CCL's textile business was transferred to Dystar India, a subsidiary of the 50:50 joint venture between Hoechst AG and Bayer AG. It also has a non-compete clause till 2002.
BASF has a presence in leather chemicals, agro chemicals, textile dyes, dispersing agents, expendable polystyrene and specialty chemicals. India and China have been identified by the parent for large investment over the next 5-10 years. It is a 50 per cent subsidiary of BASF, AG Germany. The company's integrated chemicals complex at Mangalore is part of this strategy. This is being viewed as one of BASF's future global sourcing points.
The company recently expanded its activity for manufacturing of leather chemicals, metal complex dyes and polymer dispersion by commissioning of facilities at Mangalore.
It has also executed projects at its Mangalore and Turbhe units for expansion / upgradation of its facilities for cypermethrin and styropor, synthetic tanning agents, dispersions and metal complex dyes. The project was partly funded by two rights issues of Rs 19.17 crores in January 1995 and Rs 57.51 crores in 1996.
BASF's textile dyes division manufactures and markets a range of specialty chemicals, textile auxiliaries, dispersions and metal complex dyes. About a year ago, the company also introduced super plasticizers for the building and construction industry and styrene butadiene dispersions for the paper industry.
