
CHENNAI, JAN. 4. The glory of the primary scriptures of Hinduism, the Vedas, has been hailed by the sages of yore who were well- versed in them. They do not have an origin and an end, and are revealed to humanity at the time of creation. They deal with all aspects of life in the world and are broadly divided into two sections. The Karma Kanda deals with the rituals and sacrifices that are essential for material prosperity and the other section, the Jnana Kanda, focusses on the goal of liberation from bondage.
So they serve both the human ideals of worldly prosperity and spiritual well-being which are envisaged in the four Purusharthas (Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksha). The rituals prescribed in them cover the entire spectrum of human life.
Dharma is the basis of all the goals of human endeavour. Thus for both worldly achievements and the spiritual goal of liberation, Dharma forms the basis. Dharma is not just righteous behaviour and the scriptural tenets governing human conduct. Its connotation varies according to the context. For all practical purposes whatever is prescribed in the Vedas must be accepted as the last word on Dharma.
In his discourse, Sri E. J. Kumaraswamy Dikshitar said that Veda was defined as that which gives knowledge of the Supreme Being who is beyond the ken of human senses and intellect. The Tamil word ``Marai'' for the Vedas also gives the same meaning - that which reveals what is hidden to human intelligence.
The language of the Vedas is unique in that the vibrations of the syllables in the Vedic mantras are subtle and potent. Hence Vedic language is not restricted just to linguistic applications.
The Vedas have been transmitted only in the oral tradition by the teacher to the disciple since time immemorial and this cannot be altered with advances in teaching technology as proper enunciation is the key to their efficacy. Chanting of the Vedas is essential not only for the welfare of humanity but also for the sustenance of the entire universe. Besides, its recitation is prescribed as an antidote to the sins of mankind. Further, Vedic chanting alone confers the result of performing all the five daily obligatory sacrifices a person is enjoined to do.
The Vedas are eulogised as ``the breath of the Supreme Being'' as they are eternal in nature and have not been created by anyone. The Bhagavad Gita refers to the Vedas as ``Sastra'' thus underscoring the fact that they are the ulitmate authority. When the Vedas are nurtured properly there will be all-round well- being just as all parts of a tree get nourishment when the roots are watered.
