
CHENNAI, JAN. 2. The ESI Act is now applicable to non-seasonal factories using power and employing 10 or more persons and non- power using factories and specified establishments employing 20 or more persons.
As of now, employees of the covered factories and establishments drawing wages not exceeding Rs. 6,500 per month are covered under the scheme.
According to the ESI regional office (Tamil Nadu), far reaching changes are proposed to be made to improve the quality of medical benefits and increase the level of satisfaction among the insured population. The recommendations of the Satyam Committee have been accepted by the Corporation.
Now, the permanent disablement benefit and disablement benefit paid periodically are increased once in two years, to off-set the effect of inflation and the ceiling of medical expenditure per insured persons family unit has been increased to Rs. 600 from Rs. 500. The Government has also decided to amend the ESI Act in order to provide disablement benefit and dependent's benefit to the employees who sustain employment injury while commuting to and from the factory. This facility, which was extended earlier had been struck down by the Supreme Court. The Government had then amended the provisions of the ESI Act to restore the benefit. Employees who receive wages of Rs. 40 only, per day, are being exempted from payment of employees share of the contribution. To curtail administrative delay in providing extended sickness benefit to the insured, suffering from any of the 29 specified long term diseases, the powers of the director general have now been delegated to the regional director.
To give timely help to the insured who suffer from diseases for which expensive treatment is required, the Corporation is constituting a revolving fund with the aim of providing advance to the institutions which provide superspeciality treatment. The fund will be administered at the State Government level, jointly by the regional director and the State Government.
