
INDONESIA HAS BEEN engulfed by one crisis after another. For more than two years now, the archipelago has been gripped by violence, street fights, communal flare-ups and calls for separation. The latest in this spiral has been the communal fire in Ambon and the whole of the Spice Islands. This was considered to be an oasis of communal harmony in the country, even during the height of the showdown between the majority Muslims and the minority ethnic Chinese at the height of the economic crisis in 1997. Obviously, the virus is spreading and the Spice Islands have also been infected by this deadly poison. Ambon and its environs are mostly dominated by the Christians, but they have traditionally maintained a harmonious relationship with the Muslims. Reports suggest that a religious flare-up now and then over the past few months ignited new tensions. A similar upsurge during Christmas has apparently resulted in this spurt in violence. Mosques and churches have been torched and close to a hundred people have been killed in sectarian violence this month. The toll is estimated at around 700 for 1999. In a bid to contain the violence, the military (TNI) has taken over control of the Spice Islands, but even it will need time to quell the rebellion and douse the fires.
Starting from the economic crisis that gripped Indonesia in September 1997, there have been crises galore. Many expected the violence to subside when the former President, Mr. Suharto, stepped down in May 1998 and let his Vice-President, Mr. B.J. Habibie, take over the reins. But the agitated youth, who were on the streets across the archipelago, were not satisfied. They demanded and got fresh elections - first to parliament and then for the presidency. In the meantime, the crisis in East Timor climaxed with a `popular consultation' under the U.N. auspices, which led to the vote for independence. That process is still in progress. Before the new President, Mr. Abdurrahman Wahid, could settle down in office and complete a round of visits to his neighbouring countries violence erupted in Aceh, for the right to self-determination and independence. In addition to the undercurrent of a divide between the dominant race from Java and those living in Sumatra, the new administration has also to deal with the simmering problems in a host of islands, particularly Irian Jaya. During the three decades of the Suharto regime, the armed forces had acquired enormous clout and some of the regional commanders were a law unto themselves. Their actions and the alienation of the people from Jakarta seems to be largely responsible for this upsurge in violence and the trend towards separation in a more democratic environment.
For the President, Mr. Wahid, and his deputy, Ms. Megawati Sukarnoputri, who would like to succeed him, the challenge that lies ahead is daunting, to say the least. After promising a referendum in Aceh, Mr. Wahid is now arguing that independence will not be a choice. His Government is now planning to hold a conference of representative delegates from that province to evolve an acceptable solution. Unfortunately, the representation given to the regions and provinces in the Indonesian parliament has never been enjoyed by the people or their genuine leaders. They have gone to cronies and hand-picked friends of the erstwhile first family. It is now up to the President to undertake a serious reform of the Constitution and the electoral system to ensure that the People's Representative Assembly truly becomes representative of the people from across the archipelago. This eruption of violence around the country will be part of the process of democratisation and the atmosphere of new-found freedom. The success of the Government will lie in finding solutions, introducing democracy at the grassroots, not in suppressing these voices of dissent.
