
THE STILL air of the night is punctured by the sound of an idea in the making - a slight breeze sets in and the mood swings from an embryonic beginning to a whole that will materialise with renewed pledges and promises for a better tomorrow on January 8, 2000 at the sylvan surroundings of the Indian Institute of Technology, Chennai. The plaintive cry of concerned individuals are couched in specially written songs by Ajith and Kailee that call upon citizens to stop and think how they can save the earth from destruction - wrought by greedy money-making monsters. The songs are purely a manifestation of the realities that are staring at our faces - clean water growing scarcer, forests dwindling, marine mammals declining, indigenous human population disappearing, the fisheries collapsing, protein shortages emerging, productive topsoil diminishing, contamination by pesticides and industrial chemicals steadily growing, species loss accelerating, chronic diseases rising throughout the industrialised world... this list only brushes the surfaces.
Of course the world is now more aware of the hazards of indiscriminate destruction of the natural resources and the natural cycle of life - thanks to the awareness created by organisations such as the Greenpeace International organisation dedicated to the protection of the environment by peaceful means.
Greenpeace was formed in 1971 when a group of Canadian and U.S. activists set sail to express their opposition to U.S. nuclear testing by bearing witness at the test site on the Aleutian island of Amchitka. Their courage, commitment and the non-violent method of their protest set an example that thousands of people since followed to bring about a greener and more peaceful planet. Greenpeace campaigns against environmental abuse through the use of non-violent direct action, the lobbying of relevant authorities and international conventions, by providing alternatives and solutions in the form of studies, reports and the promotion of environmentally responsible technology and products.
Greenpeace activists have steered dinghies under hazardous waste drums, sailed into nuclear test zones, blocked toxic effluent pipes, manoeuvred themselves between whale and harpoon, climbed chimney and hung banners from bridges. Such non-violent action highlights the dangers facing the environment and puts pressure on authorities to change. Over the last fifteen years the Greenpeace has lobbied to ensure that Asia does not become a dumping ground for poisonous wastes and dirty technologies such as waste incinerators from the west.
Unfortunately, despite all this, the Bhopal tragedy took place - on a black Sunday in December, 1984. Fifteen years after the gas leak, the disaster still continues in Bhopal. The survivors are in desperate need of medical attention and many continue to die from exposure related illnesses. Breathlessness, persistent cough, diminished vision, early age cataract, loss of appetite, menstrual irregularities recurrent fever, neurological disorders, fatigue, weakness, anxiety, depression are the most common symptoms among survivors. As a result of the routine dumping of toxic wastes by factory management the soil and ground water around the factory are contaminated with several toxic chemicals.
To focus on this and other environmental disasters, the Greenpeace campaigning in India is stressing on "No More Bhopals". A meeting of minds led to the idea of doing a show with specially written songs in Bombay and China - Nityanand Jayaraman, Asia Toxics Campaigner of Greenpeace met John Antony, a member of the music group The Banned through Vinayan of The School, and requested him to do a show to express solidarity with the victims of the Bhopal gas tragedy. Once the ball was set rolling things started moving with a great sense of urgency and the magnitude of the environmental crisis brought help from all quarters. Thus was "No More Bhopal" born with Suresh Kailash (Kailee) of Lintas writing and composing the song. John Antony or Johnny and Keith Peters of the Peters Brothers arranged it with Shudeep lending his voice to it and Malgudi Shubha and Rudy David of Rediffusion, Bangalore supported him. Allwyn powered the chords while Johnny and Jaishankar did the keyboard programming and recording - Arvind Murli and The Place did the rhythm programming and P. Balraman, recording engineer did the mastering. Finally Real Image and The Place provided the CD copies. Sivan and graphic design go together - he has designed the posters, publicity pamphlets and will also be doing the stage decor at IIT. A gut wrenching 40-second video followed with Martin George writing the script and wielding the camera. Satyajith provided the H1-8 camera, and the film was edited by Krishna.
To express solidarity with the cause and the show the Greenpeace campaign ship The Rainbow Warrior is sailing into Chennai on Januay 7 in a peaceful mission. She arrives with the message - "No More Bhopals." The wind powered Rainbow Warrior has a long and rich history of international campaigns for environmental justice - the very name Rainbow Warrior was inspired by a North American Indian legend which prophesies that when man destroys the world through greed the warriors of the rainbow will arise to save it. The new Rainbow Warrior replaces the original ship that was sunk by the French Secret Service in 1985. Equipped with the latest in electronic navigation sailing and communication equipment, she is a campaign vessel. For the ship that has travelled the world's waters this is the first visit to India.
Four groups will be participating in the specially organised show at IIT-Earth Born with its acoustic music features Mahesh, Sajini, Jagdeesh Madhuri and Joy; Oh God, another Madras-based group which says that it does simple music very seriously and serious music very simply - features Mridula, Shudeep, Sundar and Tabla Mani. Thermal And A Quarter, a Bangalore-based rock group features Rzhude (Rudy) Bruce and Rajeev; and The Banned with its new age compositions and melodies features Shudeep, Rzhude, Shuba, Keith, Eugene, Biju, Ramachandran, Rainer, Arun Rasjamani and John Antony.
None of these groups is looking for any personal glory - all of them are in it out of concern and the care they would like to express for the destruction of the planet earth - the world was created beautiful let us save and protect it - is their message through music -
With a little help from everybody
Yes it's all about little helps really
About cleaning up our act, basically
It's all about training the little fellow on waste disposal
About teaching the motorists the need for pollution free roads
About making the industrialists aware of the need for a pollution free environment
It's about giving mother earth the due respect
It's about treating people as the end itself
Yes it's all about CARING
CHITRA MAHESH
