
NEW DELHI, JAN. 4. The Finance Minister, Mr. Yashwant Sinha, today proposed the most stringent punishment for the corrupt and said globalisation and decentralisation would have to go together for economic development and a cleaner society.
Speaking at a book release function here this evening, he said it was important to trust the officials to instil confidence unless they were proved otherwise. However, if they were proved dishonest, they should be given exemplary punishment.
He said India had inherited the feeling of distrust from the British who had to rule an alien country. This distrust which had to be done away with to speed up the developmental process.
India was not merely globalising but also decentralising and both were characterised by inherent challenges. Globalisation and decentralisation would have to go together in the face of all these challenges for a cleaner society and more development, the Finance Minister said after releasing the book `Fighting Corruption and Restructuring Government'.
The book, written by the Chief Vigilance Commissioner, Mr. N.Vittal and Dr. S. Mahalingam, focusses on a systematic approach for fighting corruption and restructuring the Government, followed by creating a culture of excellence, changing the role of administrator, the importance of corporate governance in liberalised environment, challenges of global competition and managerial challenges for Indian industry, core competencies of India 2010 etc.
Programme against graft
Mr. Vittal said at a seminar on `Corruption - a challenge of 21st Century' that the Central Vigilance Commission had prepared a 13- point programme to eradicate corruption.
``Going by the Prime Minister, Mr. A.B. Vajpayee's announcement of zero tolerance corruption, we have prepared a 13- point programme as everything seems 13 with the Vajpayee Government,'' he said.
The programme includes a provision to trap ``corrupt'' public servants and initiate immediate disciplinary action against them.
- PTI
