
COLOMBO, JAN. 2. The suicide bombers suspected to be behind the December 18 twin explosions - one of which was an attempt to assassinate the Sri Lankan President - Ms. Chandrika Kumaratunga, are reported to have been identified. Army officials, confirming Sri Lankan media reports, said the two are a woman from Mullaitivu and a man from Trincomalee belonging to the LTTE.
The one behind the attempt on Ms. Kumaratunga is a 26-year-old Black Sea Tigress, Niro, from Karupattimurippu near Mullaitivu. A member of the 29 batch of LTTE trainees, she is said to have been an expert in firing rocket propelled grenades.
While Niro's attempt on Ms. Kumaratunga failed, the other suicide bomber, identified as 25-year old Sukkath, killed the former Army Chief of Staff, Maj. Gen. (Retd) Lucky Alagama, at an election rally organised by the Opposition United National Party (UNP) at Ja-Ela, a Colombo suburb, on the same night.
Sukkath is said to have belonged to the 18th batch of Black Tigers trained in the Iranamadu jungles in the Vanni and was recruited by an LTTE intelligence cadre from the eastern Trincomalee district. Fluent in Sinhala, Sukkath is said to have been in Colombo since 1997.
Probe into blast
Sleuths investigating the twin blasts have blamed ``security lapses'' for the attempt on Ms. Kumaratunga, the Sunday Times has reported.
Quoting a senior police investigator, it said that ``at least 10 senior police officers have been held responsible to the serious breach of security that led to the abortive LTTE bomb attack'' on the President. The names of these officers have been included in a secret interim report to the Defence Ministry, the daily said, adding that in the case of the blast at the UNP meet, ``political considerations'' had led to the selection of a ``less secure venue.''
Muslim youths for Chechnya?
PTI reports:
Sri Lanka is verifying the reported arrests of 38 Muslim youths from the country by Russian authorities while they were on their way to Chechnya.
The Foreign Ministry was enquiring into reports that the youths carrying false papers were held recently at Astrakhan airport with intentions to visit Dagestan, near Chechnya, where the Russian army is conducting a military campaign to crush Muslim rebels.
