
CHENNAI, JAN. 3. It was at once a peek into the past and a peek into the future, just the sort of stuff that makes sport what it is - glorious, unpredictable and exciting.
But, it is the future that concerns us. And, going by the evidence of Monday evening on tennis's biggest stage in India - the Gold Flake Open - the future is not as gloomy as many might have believed it to be.
What we got on the opening day was no more than a peek, a quick half-glance at best. But that was enough to reassure you that the new, young face of Indian tennis, Sunil Kumar, is much more than a one-week wonder.
Playing the veteran pro from Haiti, Ronald Agenor, in his first match in a major international tournament, the 16-year- old National hardcourt champion showed no signs at all of stage fright, playing out a new role as if he was born for it. Neither his opponent's age nor his impressive credentials seemed to play on Sunil Kumar's nerves as he produced a performance deserving of the honour he had received - a wild card in an ATP Tour event at age 16.
That Agenor, who last year, at age 35, became the oldest player to finish in the top 100 since Jimmy Connors in 1992, won the first round match 6-4, 6-4 is, in the context of Indian tennis, nowhere as significant as the fact that Sunil Kumar proved that he is a boy who is man enough to take on the big role.
A lot of eyebrows were raised when Sunil Kumar was given the wild card ahead of many Indian players ranked well above him in the ATP rankings. But, the All India Tennis Association as well as IMG cannot be faulted for looking a little ahead than many of the others. And Sunil Kumar did not shame them tonight.
On the other hand, with his wonderfully aggressive tennis - which, in the hands of a top coach, can be turned into just the sort of thing that Indian tennis has been dreaming of - the teenager from Chandigarh not only thrilled the crowd at the stadium but proved beyond doubt that he has immense potential.
The wonderful thing about Sunil Kumar is he is unafraid to go for his shots. Neither the stature of the opponent nor the stage seems to cramp his style. He went out there and played his natural game and made a deep impression on those who watched him.
The left-handed teenager hit hard, deep groundstrokes and brought off some lovely volleys when he ventured up. His touch at the net was exquisite and the only thing he needs to learn is to tighten up his game when it comes to the crunch. After swapping a break with his opponent, Sunil Kumar lost serve in the 10th game from a position of strength (40-15). In the second set again he played very well before losing serve, and the match, in the 10th game.
Earlier, in the first match on the centre court, David Sanguinetti of Italy edged Adrian Voinea of Romania 7-6(7), 6-4.
The last thing most us would want to do is to end our annual holidays on December 31 and get down to serious business on New Year's eve or on the morning of a fresh, new year. But if you happen to be playing tennis for a living, you'd probably end up doing just that.
For the professsional, tennis circus pitches tents in places as far apart as Chennai and Doha and Adelaide less than 24 hours after the first dawn of the new year. And any player who has any hopes of making an impression at the first Grand Slam event of the year - the Australian Open - had better rise and shine early enough to climb on to the tightrope all over again.
So, it was business as usual all over again for Davide Sanguinetti and Adrain Voinea exactly at 5 p.m. on Monday at the Nungambakkam Tennis Stadium. And neither of them was complaining about having to open the proceedings in the tournament on the centre court.
Instead, both players brought along with their kit bags a deadly seriousness that you might expect of men given to watch a firing squad carry out a public execution. And the attitude reflected on their tennis too once the match began. There was no room, indeed, for the frivolous stuff. If opening round matches in the year's first tournaments can always be scrappy affairs short on class and long on scruffiness then this one was certainly not a bad advertisement for India's greatest tennis show, for a start that is.
Lot in common
Sanguinetti and Voinea have a lot in common, apart from the fact that both - like a vast majority of tennis players - have chosen the tiny principality of Monte Carlo to reside in. Give or take a few - dollars or ranking points or what-have-you - both men are pretty much in the same boat.
Sanguinetti won 10 matches on the Tour last year - including his Australian Open first round victory over Leander Paes - while Voinea won 15. Both men made about $200,000 and some loose change, which means that might not have been much to put away for the rainy days.
Little wonder that both men were so keen and eager on court this evening. It was a very, very tight match in which there was just one break of serve - the Italian breaking Voinea for the match in the 10th game of the second set.
Voinea, who is a serious sort of bloke with a taste for painting, classical music and philosophical literature, did seem to have the edge in the first set as he served big and varied the pace of his shots from the back of the court cleverly, although it was clear that he preferred the hard rock stuff to the soft classical for the most part.
Sanguinetti, as expressive on court as you might expect an Italian to be, did not hide his frustrations as he looked up at his wife of three months, Tatiana, and often screwed up his handsome face in agony.
With the sort of body that Michelangelo would have been proud to have chiselled out, Sanguinetti ran for everything and turned his frustrations on their head, so to say, covering the distance between a losing toiler and a prospective winner.
The Italian's first brave show of resistance came in the 12th game of the first set when he staved off a setpoint with a big ace before fighting off two more setpoints in the tiebreak. By then, Voinea's body language gave him away. The shot of the tiebreak was a backhand crosscourt pass from Sanguinetti and it came at the right time too for a 7-6 lead before two successive groundstroke errors from Voinea helped the Italian wrap up the set.
A little over 10 feet above the court, in the box reserved for players' guests, Tatiana allowed herself a broad smile. And Voinea did little to wipe that off the beautiful face of his opponent's wife in the second set.
The lanky Romanian did wipe out three breakpoints to hold to 4-4 but lost serve the next time to go down in an hour and 41 minutes.
``The first match of the year is always tough. I fought well today, I concentrated well. The crowd here is just wonderful, I love the atmosphere,'' said Sanguinetti, whose favourite pastime at home is to watch tapes of matches played by his idol, Miloslav Mecir, the man nicknamed the Big Cat.
Sanguinetti, to be sure, was more than a poor man's Big Cat this evening.
Other results (first round): Martin Damm (Cze) bt Christophe Rochus (Bel) 6-3, 6-0; Lorenzo Manta (Sui) bt Tomas Zib (Cze) 7- 5, 6-2; Orlin Stanoytchev (Bul) beat Paul Kilderry (Aus) 6-4, 7- 6.
Final qualifying round: Andy Ram (Isr) bt Jiri Vanek (Cze) 6-4, 6-4; Jamie Delgado (GBR) bt Eyal Ran (Isr) 2-6, 6-2, 6-1; Yaoki Ishii (Jpn) bt Tuomas Ketola (Fin) 6- 3, 6-1; Martin Spottl (Aut) bt Barry Cowan (GBR) 6-3, 6-4.
Ulihrach injured
CHENNAI, JAN. 3. Bohdan Ulihrach of the Czech Republic, a main draw singles player at the Gold Flake Open, suffered a twist in the ankle while playing in a qualifying round doubles match on Monday and was wheeled out on a stretche.
Ulihrach and partner Vanek were trailing 3-6, 0-3 and 0-30 on Vanek's serve when the bizarre incident happened as Ulihrach moved for a return. His right ankle twisted and he was unable to get on to his feet. The match ended there in favour of Stanoytchev and Smolensky even as the medical team rushed in. The doctors had the injured ankle bandaged and sought his removal to a hospital for an X-ray to ascertain the damage.
From the look of it Ulihrach may have fallen into another bad phase in his career barring a dramatic recovery. He had been listed to play the Japanese, Yaoki Ishii in the first match on the outside court on Tuesday.
Tuesday's schedule
5 p.m. start:
Centre court: Singles: Leander Paes (Ind) v Julien Boutter (Fra), Oleg Ogorodov (Uzb) v Carlos Moya (Esp), Yevgeny Kafelnikov (Rus) v Michal Tabara (Cze) and Andy Ram (Isr) v Cedric Pioline (Fra).
Court I: Singles: Jamie Delgado (GBR) v Byron Black (Zim), Andreas Vinciguerra (Swe) v Alex Lopez-Moron (ESP), Jerome Golmard (Fra) v Martin Spottl (Aut); Doubles: Boutter (Fra)/Rochus (Bel) v Nitin Kirtane/Sandeep Kirtane (Ind).
Court II: Singles: Yaoki Ishii (Jap) v Bohdan Ulihrach (Cze), Laurence Tieleman (Ita) v Markus Hantschk (Ger), Fredrik Jonsson (Swe) v Jan Kroslak (Svk).
