
NEW DELHI, JAN. 1. The eight-day-long hijack episode which ended on Friday night with the release of three militants in exchange for safe return of 154 hostages has put a big question mark on the country's security management and the strategy to tackle terrorism on a long-term basis.
While security experts are almost unanimous in describing the deal with the hijackers as ``best of the bad bargains'', they have also expressed apprehensions that the step would enhance the morale of the militants in Jammu and Kashmir and deal a blow to the fight of the security forces against cross-border terrorism in the Kashmir Valley and the North- Eastern States as well.
The episode has also come as a reminder to speed up investigations and trial of criminals and terrorists already lodged in different jails. The fight against terrorism loses its bite once the trial gets delayed due to various reasons. Clearly, there is a need to give a fresh look on the country's criminal justice administration system.
It turns out to be ironical that the country's top police officials were putting their heads together at a three-day national conference here a fortnight ago pondering over the prevailing internal security scenario; ways to sharpen their skills in tackling terrorism and steps to boost morale of the police force in the States.
Rather disturbing facts were churned out before the State police chiefs by the Union Home Secretary, Mr. Kamal Pande, so far as cases pertaining to terrorists were concerned. It was taken note of that more than four years have passed since the lapse of Terrorists and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act (TADA) on May 23, 1995.
Consider this: as many as 4,958 TADA cases are still under investigation or trial. About 1,384 cases out of these are still under investigation. Of these, 684 cases are pending in Jammu and Kashmir and 611 in Assam. Obviously, both these States need to make time-bound efforts to complete investigations in these long- pending cases. With an upsurge in insurgency and militancy and developing nexus of their promoters with organised crime, gun running, drug trafficking and smuggling, there is an urgent need to fix a time-frame to dispose of the cases of terrorist crimes and take steps to implement the recommendations of the National Police Commission which had reviewed the Indian police system that now dates back to 1861.
The three terrorists who were released by the Government - Maulana Masood Azhar, Ahmed Omar Sheikh and Mushtaq Zargar - had been lodged in various jails for the past five years or so. While 142 foreign mercenaries have been arrested in Jammu and Kashmir since 1991, as many as 1,380 have been killed by security forces during the same period in the border State. A majority of these hail from Pakistan, Pakistan-occupied Kashmir and Afghanistan.
Intelligence sources estimate that nearly 1,500 foreign mercenaries are operating in Jammu and Kashmir at present. Militancy in the State has acquired a ``jehadi'' fervour in the post-Kargil phase and foreign militants are attacking the security forces in a straight-forward and daring manner.
The recent killing of Jammu and Kashmir policemen at Srinagar's busy Lal Chowk, attack on Special Operations Group (SOG) camp last week by heavily armed militants and attacks on the camps of the Army and Rashtriya Rifles appear to be part of a carefully crafted strategy of striking a blow on the morale of the troops engaged in counter-insurgency operations.
Senior officials in the Home Ministry are also concerned over the recent wave of violence triggered by the Left- wing extremism in Bihar, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh. Active efforts are being made from outside the country to revive militancy in Punjab. Pakistan's ISI continues to encourage and engineer cross-border terrorism, fuel communal unrest, cause sabotage in vital and sensitive installations and pump in fake currency and drugs.
Organised crime has been flourishing with impunity concomitantly with smuggling, arms-trafficking, drugs- trafficking, kidnappings and extortions. Officials describe the internal security scenario as ``grim and worrisome''.
