
ISLAMABAD, JAN. 2. In a sudden shift of tack, the Taliban today denied that any of its functionaries had stated that the five hijackers and three militants had left Kandahar for Quetta in north-west Pakistan.
A report in the Jang newspaper on Saturday quoted the Taliban Information Minister, Mr. Abdul Hai Mutmaen, as saying that the hijackers had left Kandahar for Quetta after Iftar.
Today, the Taliban said Mr. Mutamen was not the Information Minister. Whatever his status, Mr. Mutmaen is certainly an officially-designated Taliban spokesman. Interestingly, the militia denied a report that had appeared in a Pakistani newspaper yesterday.
The Taliban also made the rather bizarre claim that under the agreement reached between the militia, the Government of India and the hijackers, the three parties were bound not to reveal the ``destination'' of the desperadoes. This belated denial by the Taliban appears to be an obvious consequence of the negative publicity for Pakistan after reports that the hijackers had left for Quetta on Friday evening.
Pak. denies charge
In another development, a Pakistan Foreign Office spokesman rejected the Indian charge that the hijackers were Pakistani nationals. ``Levelling of baseless and false allegations against Pakistan is (a) part and peculiar element of Indian tactics,'' he said. Pakistan, the spokesman said, had made all possible efforts for the safety and welfare of the hostages. The Indian claim that four Pakistani nationals were on board had also proved to be false, he said.
``India should refrain from levelling such allegations which is being done out of its petty interest to hide its shortcomings,'' the spokesman said. On the Indian claim that extra arms had been supplied after the aircraft was hijacked, he said: ``The flight had originated from New Delhi and also had stopped in Amritsar. The arms could be delivered at these spots.''
The Pakistani Interior Minister, Lt. Gen. Moinuddin Haider (retd.), claimed on Saturday that the hijackers and the three released prisoners had not entered Pakistan. ``Pakistan is on a high alert, and in case they enter Pakistani territory, they will be apprehended and tried as per established international rules and conventions to which Pakistan is a signatory,'' he was quoted as telling the official APP news agency.
The Interior Minister said the hijackers and the released terrorists would not be allowed to enter Pakistan. ``In case they sneak into NWFP (North-West Frontier Province) or Balochistan, they will be detained and tried according to law and rules.''
