
IS THE TMC leader Mr. Moopanar consciously setting for himself a healthy conduct- rule that will break the traditional apathy political leaders in the State show towards their rivals? His engagements during the last two weeks seem to suggest so.
While party workers and leaders believe that even sharing a common platform with rivals amounts to ``anti-party'' activity, Mr. Moopanar shared some joyous moments of religious significance with AIADMK General Secretary, Ms. Jayalalitha at an Iftar Party organised by the latter on December 26. Within an hour, he was seen in the company of DMK President Mr. Karunanidhi at the grand finale of ``Rajni 25.''
Mr. Moopanar shared a platform with Mr. Karunanidhi again within days. This time, at Kanyakumari, on the occasion of the unveiling of the statue of the saint-poet Tiruvalluvar. The title of a book, he presented to the Chief Minister was more eloquent than his gesture of political tolerance. ``You Can Win,'' the book said.
On the eve of the millennium, the veteran leader was taking part in yet another pathbreaking initiative. When the Luz Avenue Residents' Welfare Association organised a unique candle-relay, Mr. Moopanar became one of the active participants. The association distributed candles to all the residents in the area. One resident lit the lamp and took it to his/her neighbour and lit the candle there. The candle from the second house was taken to the next house and so on. Soon the entire area was shining with candle-light which radiated an extremely reassuring togetherness of people irrespective of their religions and castes. The next day, Mr. Moopanar said he felt as if he got some extra energy from this experience.Interestingly, during the same period, Mr. V. R. Nedunchezhian, AIADMK leader, and Mr. Ramadoss, PMK leader, had declined invitations for the Kanyakumari function on flimsy grounds.
* * *
OFFICER DISPOSES, politician disposes. If there is still room to maneuver, the officer goes to the Chief Minister. This has been the common rule in the state's ``babudom'' for quite some time.
In the latest incident, a senior IAS officer transferred an Assistant Commissioner in the city who was not found effective in curtailing the diversion of PDS stock in his division. But within no time, the Assistant Commissioner stalled the procedure, thanks to the powerful strings he could pull. Unable to digest the humiliation, particularly at the hands of a junior, the IAS officer went on leave.
But, the story did not end there. The matter went to the Chief Minister's ``court.'' He empathised with the well-meaning senior and ordered the redemption of his prestige. The Assistant Commissioner sulked as the senior joined duty with broad smile.
* * *
IF ONE believes that in politics, a leader has to always favour his men, there can be exceptions. Two DMK councillors who went by ``conventional wisdow'' had to rub their eyes in disbelief, recently, when the Mayor Mr. M. K. Stalin cancelled two tenders awarded to their acolytes.
According to sources, tenders were floated for projects, buildings and works planned with the councillors' ward development fund a few months ago. The contract in the Tondiarpet zone went to a person who was close to two senior DMK councillors.Though the estimated cost of the work was only Rs. 4.86 crores, the tenders were finalised at Rs. 5.4 crores. The influential contractors had forced other bidders to quote high and help themselves get the contract. But when the issue was brought to the notice of Mr. Stalin, he immediately issued notice for retender. The work was finally awarded to a contractor who quoted Rs. 4.36 crores.
Mr. Stalin not only set an example, but saved almost Rs. 1 crore for the Corporation.
(By N. Kalyanasundaram, S. Vydhianathan and S. Natarajan)
