
BERHAMPUR, JAN. 3. Tension continued in Adaba police station area of Gajapati district where eight persons were killed following a clash between tribals and police on Thursday and the tribals torching eight houses at Amarpur village the next day, police said.
The State Government ordered an administrative inquiry by the Revenue Divisional Commissioner (Southern Division), Mr. Jagadananda Panda, into the clash at Majhiguda village.
While media reports suggested that the tribals had also attacked the Pano (Scheduled Caste) Christians, the Chief Minister, Mr. Hemananda Biswal, who visited the area on new year's day, said today that there was no communal angle to the clash.
There were Christians among the tribals, who attacked the village, and also the scheduled castes who were targeted, he said and added that the issue revolved round economic issues, particularly dispute over control of land, he said.
Mr. Biswal said if necessary, a judicial probe could also be ordered.
The BJD president and Union Minister for Mines and Minerals, Mr. Naveen Patnaik, had demanded a judicial inquiry while holding the Government responsible for the clash. The Government is obviously not responsive to the situation, he said.
Reports received here from Berhampur said the tribals attacked Amarpur village after a police camp set up there was withdrawn. All the villagers had fled apprehending attack by the tribals.
However, no casualty had been reported in the second incident.
At Majhiguda, police had fired about 30 rounds in self-defence against the armed tribals killing seven of the attackers, including a woman. A man was also killed allegedly by the tribals. Police had detained three persons in this connection.
According to Mr. Panda, the situation in the area was now tense but under control.
About 10 platoons of armed policemen and 20 senior police officers, including two IGPs and two DIGs of police were camping in the area.
The Chief Minister was told that the dispute over 15 acres was the main cause of the tension.
But the sudden provocation for the attack on the police camp and Majhiguda village was caused by the alleged breaking of a toddy pot by a policeman which the police have denied.
The tribals grievance is that the police were taking the Scheduled Castes' side instead of solving the dispute.
- PTI
