
The relatives of the hijacked passengers clung on to the last resort of every human - hope. PRANAB DHAL SAMANTA on their mood through the crisis.
THE CONSPIRACY behind the hijack of Indian Airlines IC 814 from Kathmandu to Kandahar via Amritsar, Lahore, and Abu Dhabi is convoluted with several twists and turns. Although the overall picture of the hijacking is still fuzzy, its basic objective of obtaining the release of the hardcore pan-Islamic insurgents from Indian jails has succeeded.
Maulana Masood Azhar, Mushtaq Ahmed Zargar and Sayed Sheikh have been handed over to the Taliban in Kandahar in the presence of the External Affairs Minister, Mr. Jaswant Singh in return for the safe release of the hostages on the plane which was hijacked on Christmas eve.
Pakistan has, in the past, officially sought Masood Azhar's release and a letter by the former Pakistan Interior Minister, Mr. Nasrullah Babar, seeking his discharge from an Indian jail is reportedly with the Government of India.
According to information available with TheHindu, the key pieces of the hijack puzzle can be traced to Nepal, where a global network of terrorists, smugglers and underworld goons appears to have been galvanised under the watchful eye of Pakistan.
Inquiries in Kathmandu reveal that the final preparations for the hijacking began on December 13. Five tickets were booked on that day for the December 27 Indian Airlines flight to New Delhi - two executive class tickets for Ahmad A. Sheikh and S. A. Qazi and three economy class tickets separately for Ibrahim Mistry or Ibrahim Azhar, suspected to be the brother of Masood Azhar, Sayeed Akhtar Syed and Rajesh Gopal Verma.
The bookings were made by Everest Travel and Tours and Himalayan Travel and Tours, with Kunal Guest House in Kathmandu as the local address.
Post-hijacking inquiries in Nepal reveal that these operatives never stayed in the guest house but used its satellite phone to make calls to Pakistan. This was the key piece of information which later revealed their Pakistani antecedents.
Having booked the tickets, the suspected hijackers subsequently decided to advance their journey to December 24 after a visit by two alleged accomplices to Delhi on December 20 and 21.
Events moved rapidly on December 24, hours before the hijacking. Gopal Tanmarkar, a notorious smuggler in Nepal, bought a ticket for IC-814. Tanmarkar was apparently accompanied by a tall, fair- complexioned man in a lounge suit. Tanmarkar, it is learnt, handed over a boarding pass to this man. It is as yet not clear whether Tanmarkar also obtained boarding passes for tickets of the other three main hijackers - Ahmad A. Sheikh, Ibrahim Mistry and Sayeed Akhtar Syed - which might have been in his possession.
Curiously, Mr. Mohammed A. Cheema, a first secretary in the Pakistani embassy in Kathmandu, it is understood, also arrived at the airport with two others - Zia Ansari and Abdul Rais Khan. Tanmarkar apparently also handed over boarding passes to these two men. It is as yet not clear whether these two actually took the flight to India or acted as conduits for transferring boarding passes to the three hijackers.
It is suspected that the trio of Ahmad A. Sheikh, Ibrahim Mistry and S. A. Qazi arrived on a PIA flight from Pakistan earlier that morning and managed to sneak into the departure area of Tribhuvan Airport with local assistance.
The hijacking which took place over Lucknow at around 4-40 p.m. entered a crucial phase once the plane was about to land at Amritsar, after Lahore refused it permission to do so. It was at Amritsar that the Indian response to the emergency was found most wanting. Indian authorities both at the senior and local level showed glaring incompetence and lack of professionalism in handling the crisis.
The poor response to the emergency, ultimately, facilitated the departure of the plane from Indian soil where counter moves were most feasible.
At the senior level, there was a delay in conveying the information of the hijacking to the Prime Minister, Mr. Atal Behari Vajpayee. According to reports, the Prime Minister and the Civil Aviation Minister, Mr. Sharad Yadav, were on a flight from Patna when information of the hijacking was first received. But Mr. Vajpayee was reportedly not informed about the event till his plane landed at Palam at 5-30 p.m.
At an institutional level, the Crisis Management Group (CMG) to give higher direction to the counter-hijack exercise was not formed quickly enough. According to the standard drill, the CMG should have been set up within half-an hour. It was formed only after the Prime Minister landed at Delhi airport.
Besides, the National Security Guard team which specialises in anti-hijacking operations landed at Amritsar only at 8-35 p.m., two hours after the plane began hovering over Raja Sansi airport and nearly four hours after the news of the hijack was first received. The NSG was asked to take-off for Amritsar only at 6-25 p.m., the hijacked plane left at around ten minutes to eight.
At the Amritsar airfield, the mandatory anti-hijacking drill - which includes the formation of a Crisis Management Committee, the Central Committee and the Aerodrome Committee to ensure a coordinated response under the overall direction of the CMG - was never really implemented.
According to the official view, the Cabinet Secretary and the Principal Secretary had personally conveyed to the local authorities to take steps to keep the plane grounded. But, confusion apparently reigned supreme at Raja Sansi airport.
The local officials who were handling the crisis in Amritsar reportedly agreed to refuel the aircraft as demanded by the hijackers. But the bowser carrying the fuel was stopped half-way after authorities in Delhi instructed that the refuelling be delayed.
The authorities on the ground never anticipated that the plane which was running dangerously low on fuel would take-off. This belief was further reinforced as the Pakistani authorities had rejected the request of the hijackers to land at Lahore a short while ago. This is one of the major factors which explains the slow official response. But with no concrete steps taken to immobilise the plane or block the runway, the plane took off for Lahore at 7-49 p.m.
The hijacking entered its second phase once the plane left Amritsar and landed at Lahore. But some loose ends about the hijack drama thereafter still remain to be tied up. At Lahore, Pakistani ``intelligence operatives'' entered the aircraft in the guise of medical personnel. They apparently insisted that the plane should leave only for Abu Dhabi.
The Pakistani insistence on Abu Dhabi is puzzling as the aircraft had the option to land at Kandahar that night. According to an intercept, the Air Traffic Control (ATC) at Kandahar had offered the hijackers permission to land. Contrary to the widely-held view, night landing facilities are available in Kandahar. But, after refuelling at Abu Dhabi, the plane left for Kandahar only the next day.
