
STREET CHILDREN - A Socio-Psychological Study: Dr. Rashmi Agrawal; Shipra Publications, 115 A, Vikas Marg, Shakarpur, Delhi-110092. Rs. 450.
DESPITE GROWING expression of concern by the international agencies, national governments and non-governmental organisations, the highly undesirable phenomenon of street children continues unabated. Rapid urban growth, accompanied by worsening conditions of poverty in the cities and towns across the developing world, has contributed considerably to the problem. A number of situational and diagnostic studies have been conducted by various researchers and scholars on the extent of and the factors responsible for the increasing numbers of street children. Dr. Agrawal's work is a valuable addition to the growing literature on the subject, but is also refreshingly different from most of the other publications in that it delves deep into the emotions and psychology of the child on the street.
Like other authors on the subject, Dr. Agrawal discusses the extent of the phenomenon of street children, the socio-economic factors leading to it and the nature and adequacy of the policies, plans and programmes at international and national levels as well as the localised action by various non- governmental organisations in dealing with the problem. In doing so, the book at times tends to treat the problem of street children and that of child labour synonymously. They are distinct, even though there is a substantial degree of overlap. The author recognises this herself and expressly mentions so.
The important contribution of the author lies, however, in the insights she provides into the psychological attributes of the children on the street - their emotions, frustrations and personality traits - and the effect of these factors on the behavioral patterns of these children in comparison to the normal school-going children living in an atmosphere of family care and affection. This is the author's field and she excels in the treatment of the subject. She combines sound analytical skills with a high degree of sensitivity and personal feeling for these disadvantaged children.
The core of the book is primarily based on personal interviews the author had with about 50 street children of various hues - rag pickers, shoe-shine boys, idlers on the street - from different locations in Delhi. The sample is perhaps small but the findings are, nonetheless, revealing.
It has been concluded, for instance, that street children are able to adjust themselves to frustrating situations as well as normal school-going children and that they attribute their frustrations to the evils of the environments they live in. They display a high degree of aggressiveness in their behaviour (which declines with growing age) and exhibit ego-defensive reaction to frustrating situations.
The author has also made an effort to compare the intelligence levels of street children with those of the children from normal homes and finds that the former are not significantly inferior to the latter. She concludes that with parental care, love and affection, and appropriate training the street children also can achieve higher levels of performance. The author prescribes a multi-pronged approach for tackling the problem of street children laying stress, among other things, on quality of parenting, educational reforms, removal of gender bias and sensitisation of the society to the issue. The rub, however, lies in giving a practical shape to these ideas and extract from all the agencies concerned, the necessary will to act.
The book is the author's second, the first being on the subject of drug abuse. The subject she has chosen for her second effort is as socially relevant as the first in the present-day world. Both are based on her personal experiences in dealing with the subjects of her work. Unlike most research publications by bureaucrats, these two works present a proper mix of cold reason with the warmth of feeling for the subjects of study.
B.V.L. NARASIMHA RAO
