
VIKAS S. KHATRI
Camels are ruminants and feed on trees, small plants, grass and bushes. Some species have been domesticated and a few still roam in the wild. In 1994, an African country Sahara (R.A.S.D.) issued a set of postage stamps on various members of camel family.
Guanaco, (28 Ptas), is the common name for a species of wild South American ruminant (cud-chewing mammal). It is found on mountains and plains in Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Peru and Paraguay. The guanaco is at home in water and can swim. A full- grown male stands 90 to 130 cm high at the shoulder and has a thick coat of long, soft, reddish-tan fur. The neck is long, with a graceful curve; and the legs are long and slender. The fur on the belly is pure white. It runs fast but succumbs to predators because of itsa curiosity. Guanacos are exploited for wool and meat and its dung is used as fuel.
Alpaca, (29 Ptas), also found in South America, is closely related to the llama and vicuna. It is commonly kept in flocks in the highlands of Peru and Chile. A sure-footed animal, it is smaller than the llama, has longer, softer wool and is not usually used as a beast of burden. The alpaca provides white, grey or yellow wool, although black and dark brown are especially valued.
Vicuna, (40 Ptas), is native to the Andes in Ecuador, Peru, and Bolivia and is a close relative of the domesticated llama. It is a small, slender animal with orange-red fur. They are hunted for their hides and wool.
Llama, (60 Ptas), is a common name for a long-eared South American ruminant. The llama stands 0.9 to 1.3m high at the shoulder and is usually white, with black and brown blotches; sometimes it is pure white or pure black.
Male llamas have been been used as beasts of burden in the Peruvian and Bolivian Andes ranges for more than 4000 years. The surefooted animals can carry as much as 91 kg for 12 hours a day, but they are not ridden. When weary or overloaded, llamas lie down and refuse to move, often spitting at their driver. The females are raised for their flesh and for their milk, which is used extensively in western South America. The long, coarse wool of both sexes is used in the weaving of textiles, and the skins are tanned for leather. The long hair is braided and used as rope, and the dried excrement is used as fuel.
Arabian camel, (105 Ptas), is a large ruminant native to the desert regions of Asia and northern Africa. There are two kinds of camels: the dromedary or Arabian camel, which has one hump; and the Bactrian camel, which has two humps. The humps are stores of flesh and fat used as nutrition when food is scarce. A camel can subsist without water for several days. The Arabian camel is adapted to subsistence in the desert by its structural qualities and by its ability to bite off and consume the thorny plants that grow there. Its nostrils may be closed against flying dust, and its eyes are shielded by very long eyelashes.
