
For all their ``espousal'' of the Kashmiri cause, the hijackers did not once speak to the international media. AMIT BARUAH probes the reasons.
THE HIJACKING of IC-814 has raised more questions than there are answers for. With the hijackers being allowed safe passage to wherever they might want to go as part of the deal with the Taliban, it has been ensured that the full story may never emerge.
The Taliban, after projecting itself as an ``honest broker'' in the hijacking episode, has lost out. The militia did do an excellent job in looking after the passengers while the aircraft was stationed at the Kandahar airport for a full week; but its handling of the situation left much to be desired. Yes, it helped in freeing the passengers, but on its terms and conditions..
Why did the Taliban let the hijackers off? If their action was un-Islamic, why were the hijackers not made to stand trial in a Taliban court of law? Given the fact that the hijackers murdered a passenger (and one of their colleagues as well), why did the Taliban not take action against these terrorists?
For all their ``espousal'' of the Kashmiri cause, the hijackers did not once speak to the international media corps that had assembled in Kandahar. Since the hijackers were able to secure ``safe passage'' for themselves, they could have also got some coverage in the international press for ``their cause''. Why did they choose not to do so?
It is clear that the identity and nationality of the hijackers could have been a source of great embarrassment for Pakistan, since independent sources corroborate the theory that the hijackers were Pakistani nationals.
During the siege of the Hazratbal shrine in Srinagar in 1993, the Jammu & Kashmir Liberation Front (JKLF) activists were finally told by their colleagues outside (after a deal was struck with the Narasimha Rao Government), to come out of the shrine since their cause had received enough publicity.
In the present case, the hijackers were embarrassed to reveal their identity. Even a masked press conference or comments to a selected international channel would have sufficed. Why did they, then, opt for this course? Presumably because it could have embarrassed Pakistan and also the Taliban.
Though it would be absurd to argue that the responsibility for the actions of individual citizens should be laid at the door of a nation-state, will Pakistan now discard its own ``diplomatic, moral and political'' support to the separatist cause in Kashmir? Will Pakistan make any move to arrest the murderous hijackers in its own territory?
Had the hijackers been Kashmiris, they would have revealed their identity. Since they were not, they slinked away from the hijacked Indian Airlines aircraft, without the ``oxygen of publicity''. Clearly, if their intention was to embarrass the Government of India and its policy on Kashmir, they lost what for them was a golden opportunity.
The demand for the release of Mushtaq Ahmed Zargar alias Latram is a curious one. A Kashmiri militant, Zargar, who operated in downtown Srinagar, was arrested way back in 1992. He has no known links to the present terrorist outfits operating in Kashmir from Pakistan. The obvious inference is that given that the other two released militants are Pakistan- born, one ``pure Kashmiri'' had to be included in the hijackers' demands.
The linkages in the ``jehadi network'' that straddles both Afghanistan and Pakistan have also been exposed following the ``departure'' of the hijackers and the three released terrorists. Will the Taliban choose to inform the world where the hijackers were let off? Which border did they cross? Did they enter Pakistan?
If the experience of the hijack itself is any indication, not much will be heard about the hijackers. They will simply melt away. Both the Taliban and Pakistan will make loud declarations against terrorism; that the hijackers are not on their soil. The question, however, will still remain - where did they go? For Pakistan, there is a parallel. When asked where the ``Kashmiri freedom-fighters'' had gone after the Kargil crisis ended in July this year, Pakistani spokesmen said they were not aware of this. The ``freedom-fighters'' had, however, not retreated into Pakistan-Occupied Kashmir (PoK) was the stand taken. This time, too, Islamabad will strenuously deny that any of the hijackers have entered their territory.
As far as the hijacking itself was concerned, the Taliban had set itself a deadline of Friday when the shoora or ruling council met in Kandahar on Wednesday. It wanted the hijacking drama to be over within that time-frame. This deadline was conveyed both to the hijackers and India.
If the information provided by the passengers in New Delhi is any indication, the hijackers were getting increasingly restive on the last day and had threatened to take action against them. Was this on account of the Taliban deadline?
It is also becoming clear that the Taliban did fear ``military action'' against the parked Indian Airlines aircraft. It had also been ``tipped off'' against an impending military response. Doubts were also cast about some members of the ``rather large'', 52-strong Indian team that arrived in Kandahar in a relief plane.
The Taliban were also rattled by a meeting between the Prime Minister, Mr. A. B. Vajpayee, and the Indian Air Force (IAF) chief, Air Chief Marshal A.Y. Tipnis. Also, information made available to the Taliban suggested that India had got in touch with Iran as the current OIC chairman to help end the hijacking. All this prompted the Taliban into setting a ``deadline'' for itself. For all intents and purposes, this deadline applied to the Government of India and the hijackers as well.
It is with this backdrop that the Taliban moved tanks, heavily armed commandos and a multi-barrelled rocket launcher to Kandahar airport on Thursday. It was an unequivocal show of strength and a signal to India that a commando action would be repulsed. Earlier, the Taliban shoora had said no foreign power would be allowed to storm the hijacked aircraft.
In the final analysis, India found itself negotiating from a weak position. India which had been working on the Taliban to obtain the storming option found that the student militia was not playing ball. The Indian decision to contact the United Arab Emirates (UAE) and Saudi Arabia, two of the three countries that recognise the Taliban Government, was a sure sign that the militia was not playing ball.
The surrender at Kandahar on New Year's Eve was a direct consequence of the inability to detain the aircraft at Amritsar's Raja Sansi airport.
