
THE EIGHTY-SEVENTH Indian Science Congress in Pune should provide an occasion to its participants during its week-long session to take a close look at the record of the country's scientists and the outlook for the future. The scenario has changed a great deal since the days of C. V. Raman, J. C. Bose and Srinivasa Ramanujan (though the last- named was more a mathematician than a scientist) who stayed within the country and could do very well with the very limited resources and research facilities and could count upon for winning recognition abroad. Distinguished and promising Indian scientists today prefer to go abroad - principally to the United States where they could see that the sky is the limit - to staying within the country and trying to make the best use of what they could command. This is borne out by the presence and achievements of a good number of Indian scientists in the Silicon Valley. With the prevailing official attitudes to performance and brilliance often being far from encouraging, it is hardly surprising that scientists in India - particularly the younger ones - are seeking greener pastures abroad. The Indian Science Congress should, among other things, take note of this brain drain which has been going on for many years now to impoverish the country and how it could be arrested.
Nourishing science talent within India should in fact be much simpler today than it was earlier in view of the revolution in Information Technology and the access which Indian Universities, research and scientific establishments could now have with many of them having already forged links with institutions abroad. The Fax, the E-Mail and the Internet are now at the service of the scientists who could use them and for which they should be extended all the official support wherever this is needed. Globalised science and IT should make this easier than it was even a decade ago. Even while browsing through the contents of science and technology journals published abroad, the names of the scientists sprinkled across the pages deck them out as an international community with Indians accounting for a growing number. The deliberations of the Indian Science Congress at Pune should take note of this scenario.
Of still greater interest to the country at large and to which attention has recently been drawn despite the globalisation of science and technology is the distinctness which India could claim for the perceptions of its outstanding scientists. This is attributed to India's rich philosophical tradition which was very much part of the mental make-up of Indian scientists in spite of many of them having had a good exposure to the West. Biographers have drawn attention to how such tradition enriched by an exposure to western science had shaped the bent of mind of outstanding Indian scientists by activating their instincts. It will perhaps be rash and even wrong to conclude that there could be anything distinguishably Indian about our outstanding scientists. Nevertheless, the emphasis which is currently being laid against compartmentalisation of science and its segregation from other realms of knowledge could well have been influenced by the Indian ways of discerning ``in the multiplicity of phenomena an underlying unity'' which Einstein would have wholly endorsed.
A lesson which scientists have learnt after quite a few knocks is to be on guard against formulation of hypotheses on the basis of findings which support them. They should be on the look-out for fresh evidence which could take them to discoveries wholly different from what they had anticipated or were even hoping for to make the scene look less complicated. There could be no getting away from such rigorous disciplining of the mind for a proper study of phenomena and the empirical conclusions which they might suggest for a comprehension of what is happening.
