
AHMEDABAD, JAN. 3. The Sangh Parivar can have the satisfaction of having sowed the seeds of doubts in the majority mind about the Christian church's intentions and objectives in Gujarat. It did not have to work very hard for this. After all, the 1990s had already produced the most satisfying results for the Sangh Parivar as Gujarat became the laboratory for brewing anti-Muslim feelings; these sentiments could easily be directed- as and when needed - towards the Christian.
If that was the Sangh Parivar's objective, then the 1998 anti- Christian violence, the resulting attention on conversion and the Prime Minister's call for a national debate on ``conversions'' all seemed to have produced the desired suspicion among the majority community. Even otherwise progressive elements and voices are not prepared to dismiss out of hand tales of the Church missionaries using allurement or sleight of hand to ``hoodwink'' the tribals into accepting Christianity. For example, Mr. Indu Jani, the widely respected Editor of Naya Marg, a journal of the Khet Vikas Parishad, recently wrote that the Pope's call for ``conversion'' in Asia was misplaced.
The oral and printed discourse in Gujarat is peppered with tales of deviousness of the ``Kristi'' missionary. One of the most common accusation is that a ``Father'' would make a few tribals sit in his jeep, and pretend that the vehicle was stalled. Then he would ask the tribals to pray to Lord Ram to make the jeep start; the machine would not oblige. Then, the tribals would be asked to chant ``Hey, Jesus'' and the jeep would come alive. A ``miracle'' is believed to have taken place, and the ``innocent'' tribal is ``tricked'' into the Christian fold.
``We have never met anyone who claims to have been tricked by the Kristi fathers; but, there is now all this talk of the Kristi fathers using clothes and money to make the Hindus convert to Christianity,'' says Ms. Shakuntala Pawar, who is associated with the Dangs Zila Vikas Trust in Subir. Asserts her colleague, Ms. Basanti Deasi: ``Fathers merely run schools; they are not engaged in proselytisation.''
Forgotten, indeed, is the fact that it was the Gujarat Government that had in the late 1970s invited the Catholic Church groups to set up schools in the tribal areas. The new mood is to indulge new prejudices. The Vishwa Hindu Parishad and its sister organisations like the Hindu Jagran Manch and the Sanskrit Raksha Manch are churning out pamphlets and slogans which seek to instil a fear of the ``unscrupulous Christian missionaries'' on a proselytisation rampage.
``There is no doubt that a few Church groups have been insensitive,'' concedes Father Cedric Prakash of St. Xavier's Social Service Society, but argues that ``that does not give anyone any licence to tarnish the entire community.'' It does not help that various church leaders are seen to be in the forefront of the drive for the empowerment of the tribals and Dalits; nor does it help that various church groups are often involved in providing moral and intellectual support to those defending their human rights and civil liberties. The taluka level officialdom is rarely amused, even if the Gandhinagar top brass pretends to be reasonable and accommodating. ``There is a lot of double-speak,'' adds Father Prakash.
Admittedly, there is a political context to the emerging fashionable anti-Christian prejudices. And this context is that the BJP rules both at the Centre and in Gandhinagar. The Hindutava voices demand that the ruling dispensation in Gandhinagar owes it to them to let them ``defend'' Hindu interests. The thrust of the speeches made at the ``Dharam Sabha'' in Ahwa in the Dangs on Christmas Day was that a ``Hindu'' government could not be indifferent to the Hindu organisations' agenda. ``The bottomline in the rhetoric of the local RSS leaders in Halmodi is that only Hindu religion can be allowed to flourish in Hindustan and that they would not let other religions get themselves entrenched,'' observes Mr. Sureshbhai Chaudhry of Songarh.
The Chief Minister, Mr. Keshubhai Patel, himself is known to be sympathetic to the VHP/RSS point of view. At a recent high-level review meeting, he is reported to have ticked off a senior official of the Home Ministry for inviting the potential displeasure of ``foreign investor,'' and reportedly observed that if he was to choose between ``Hindu interests'' and ``foreign investment'' he would rather not care for the latter. And, the irony is that Mr. Patel is supposed to be a moderate, and political observers praise his shrewdness in getting the VHP's leader, Dr. Pravin Tagodia, promoted out of Gujarat to an all- India slot.
But Mr. Patel would need more than commonplace shrewdness in dealing with the needlessly stoked ambience of distrust and suspicion between the Hindus and the Christians. His Home Minister, Mr. Haren Pandya, asserts that the BJP Government is determined to send out unambiguous signal to one and everyone - Hindu or Christian - that no one will be allowed to take liberties with the law. ``We are committed to protect the life and liberty of everyone,'' argues Mr. Pandya.
This constitutional obligation may not be sufficient as there is open acknowledgement that now there is new ``stress'' throughout South Gujarat's tribal belt. Now that Swami Ashimananda of the Vanvasi Kalyan Parishad has decided to join the battle for the tribals' mind and faith, and, more so, because he seems to be getting the official benefit of doubt, each adivasi is being reminded of his identify, Hindu or Christian. ``That is the recipe for trouble; sometimes, one brother is Christian and the other is Hindu, or the father is Hindu and his son is Christian; there is obvious dispute over family rituals, especially at the time of death,'' observes Mr. Lalsinh K. Gamit of village Chachar Bunda in Surat district. More pointedly, there is resentment of the ``Kristi'' fathers' penchant for preaching against consumption of liquor, bidi or cigarettes.
The obvious need is for statesmanship, both among the political and religious leaders. Swami Ashimananda is determined to stay put in the Dangs and the various church groups cannot be asked to pack up and leave. There will be many moments of Christian disquiet; the strict neutrality and pragmatism of the local administration will only embolden the Vanvasi Kalyan Parishad in its overbearing campaign. The only way out will be for the administration, the church leaders and the Hindu organisations to work on the indigenous tradition of tribal brotherhood and solidarity. ``Nothing will happen; Kristi is also one of us, and the Hindu is also one of us. We will stay together,'' asserts Mr. Lalsinh Gamit.
(Concluded)
