
The concept of energy independence becomes even more relevant in today's international scenario, when technology control regimes have come into force. To avoid the trap of "technological colonialism", there is no option but to develop a range of technologies to sustain development in the foreseeable future, say R. Chidambaram, Chairman, and R. B. Grover, Technical Adviser to Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission.
ENERGY independence is one of the key requisites for achieving economic independence. The `Oil Shock' of the early Seventies was one of the first events highlighting the importance of energy independence. This has been realised in countries such as France, Japan and South Korea, which once used to import most of their energy needs. Over the years they have implemented a policy of energy supply based on a prudent mix of various forms of electricity generation systems, but primarily with a significant portion in the form of nuclear power. This concept becomes even more relevant in today's international scenario, when technology control regimes have come into force. To avoid the trap of "technological colonialism", there is no option but to develop a range of technologies to sustain development in the foreseeable future. This calls for sustainable technological development strategies.
However, what is forgotten is that this requires a choice of technological options which can come about only by adopting strategies for development of technologies. This is not an easy task and requires long-range planning and that is what India has done in the Department of Atomic Energy. The country has adopted a strategy for achieving a high degree of self-reliance by carrying out research and technology development in a wide range of disciplines.
The Indian nuclear power programme commenced 30 years ago in 1969 with the building of two reactors at Tarapur and today the country has ten operating reactors and another four are nearing completion. In spite of these impressive advances, there are demand and energy shortages of the order of 11 per cent and 8 per cent respectively. According to the projections made in the 15th Electric Power Survey, the energy and peak demand are likely to increase to 596 billion kWhr and 95,750 MW respectively by the end of the Ninth Plan (2001-02) and 1,058 billion kWhr and 176,647 MW respectively by 2011-12. So India has a long way to go and it plans to harness a portfolio of energy resources such as most other countries of the world.
While coal based stations will continue to play a major role for many years to come, they are likely to pose serious problems in future arising out of transport of large quantities of coal across the country and environmental problems related to disposal of ash and emission of greenhouse gases and acid gases. Depending on the pattern of usage and the postulated growth rate, one can forecast how long the country's reasonable coal deposits will last. Estimates differ, but coal is not likely to be sufficient even for the next century.
The oil and natural gas reserves would have run out much earlier. Hydro-potential is renewable and must be exploited to the maximum but this may be resisted because of issues such as displacement of people and possible effects on ecology. Non-conventional sources such as solar, biomass and wind will play useful roles but are not suited for building high capacity power plants. Large-scale development of nuclear power is thus inevitable.
A comparison with the neighbour country China is interesting. Its coal reserves are five times as large as India's. It is the largest producer of coal in the world. Its hydel potential is also quite large. Still, to ensure energy supply security it is following a twin track policy aimed at developing indigenous nuclear reactors and is also shopping abroad for nuclear power reactors. It has an overall programme to have an installed nuclear capacity of 20 GW by 2010 and 4O GW by 2020.
To return to India's nuclear fuel resources, the uranium deposits are limited, while thorium deposits are large. Uranium-238, the dominant isotope of uranium, is a fertile material and cannot make a reactor critical by itself and has to be converted to fissile plutonium-239. The process of conversion takes place in a nuclear reactor and spent fuel from thermal reactors contains plutonium-239.
On discharge from the reactor spent fuel can be dealt with in two ways. The first one termed 'open cycle' consists of treating the entire spent fuel as waste and disposing it as such. With this approach only two per cent of the energy potential exploitable from uranium is utilised. To avoid this colossal waste, a closed fuel cycle involving reprocessing of spent fuel to separate plutonium and uranium-238 has to be pursued. Besides recovering valuable fissile material, reprocessing helps to sort out the wastes according to their activity levels and their decay period thereby assisting waste disposal and minimising environmental impact.
Similarly, thorium is a fertile material and has to be converted to a fissile material, namely, uranium-233. To ensure long term energy security for the country, India has chosen to follow a 'closed cycle' approach. Pursuit of the closed cycle approach calls for setting up of reprocessing plants and breeder reactors. India has taken cognisance of these facts, namely, resource position and need for ensuring long-term energy security and accordingly formulated a three-stage nuclear power programme.
Well established PHWR stage
The first stage comprising setting up of pressurised heavy water reactors (PHWRs) and associated fuel cycle facilities is already in the industrial domain. The speed at which India's nuclear power programme can move forward is no longer limited by technology or the country's industrial infrastructure, but by the availability of funds. The technology for the manufacture of various components and equipment for PHWRs in India is now well established and has evolved through active collaboration between the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) and the industry. Eight PHWRs are operating - two PHWRs of 220 MW rating are about to achieve criticality and another two in the year 2000. Construction work on the first two units of 500 MW commenced in 1998. As plan engineers gain experience and master various aspects of the nuclear technology, the performance of the plants is improving. The average capacity factor of Indian plants has improved from 60 per cent in 1995-96 to 75 per cent in 1998-99 and 78 per cent in the first six months of 1999-2000. Indian nuclear power plants have so far produced more than 130 billion units. They have accumulated about 150 reactor-years of operational experience free of any incident involving release of radioactivity to the environment.
To achieve high capacity factors, the plant managers had to develop repair technologies, a challenging area. Here they have achieved many successes. A few examples are: RAPS-1 (Rajasthan) south end-shield repair; MAPS-1 & 2 (Kalpakkam) Calandria inlet manifold management; repair of over-pressure relief device of RAPS-I; rehabilitation of an adjuster assembly at RAPS-2; RAPS-1 and MAPS steam generator hair-pin removal; single pressure tube removal in NAPS-I (Narora); en-masse removal and replacement of coolant channels at RAPS-2; development of a system called BARCIS to carry out in-service inspection of coolant channels; development of a system to relocate garter springs in coolant channels which have been displaced from their positions and so on.
To carry out large scale replacement of pressure tubes in NAPS type PHWRS, a semi-automatic, remotely operated coolant channel replacement machine (CCRM) consisting of a large number of subsystems, tools and components has been developed. A number of new technologies, such as servomanipulators, image processing based alignment system, and rolled joint detachment using RF induction heating were developed and have been incorporated in the system. In future, many challenges are foreseen in this area and the plant engineers are getting ready for them. The major challenges will be replacement of steam generators in RAPS/ MAPS type and in NAPS type PHWRs.
Fast breeder reactors
The second stage envisages setting up of fast breeder reactors (FBRs) backed by reprocessing plants and plutonium-based fuel fabrication plants. Fast breeder reactors are necessary to multiply fissile material inventory. Multiplication of fissile inventory is also needed to establish a higher power base for using thorium in the third stage of the nuclear power programme. When the 40 MWt Fast Breeder Test Reactor (FBTR) attained criticality on October 18, 1985, India became the sixth country after the U.S., the U.K., the then USSR, France and Japan to build and operate a fast breeder reactor.
After overcoming a number of initial problems, the reactor now operates at a power level of up to 12 MWt, the maximum possible with the smaller core being used. On July 1, 1997, the reactor was connected to the grid and fed a small amount of power. The FBTR uses a unique, indigenously developed mixed uranium carbide- plutonium carbide fuel, which has functioned extremely well up to the current burn up of over 45,000 MW days/tonne. It has provided valuable experience with liquid metal fast breeder reactor technology and the confidence to embark upon the design and technology development of a 500 MW prototype fast breeder reactor (PFBR).
The PFBR is different from the FBTR. It is a pool type reactor. Its detailed design is in advanced stage. Construction work on this is expected to start in the last year of the Ninth Plan (2001-2002). It involves major challenges in terms of manufacturing large size complex equipment to exacting standards and Indian industry is capable of meeting these challenges. This will be located at the Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research (IGCAR) at Kalpakkam near Chennai.
The third stage will be based on the thorium-uranium-233 cycle. Uranium 233 is obtained by irradiation of thorium in PHWRs and FBRS. An Advanced Heavy Water Reactor (AHWR) is being developed at Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (BARC) to expedite transition to thorium based systems. In addition, it will help sustain some of the heavy water technologies already acquired. The reactor physics design of AHWR is tuned to generate about 75 per cent power in thorium, and is to maintain negative void coefficient of reactivity under all operating conditions. The fuel configuration incorporates the use of PuO2-ThO2 MOX and ThO2-U233 O2 MOX in different pins in the same fuel cluster. The moderator consists of amorphous carbon and heavy water in 80-20 volume ratio. It involves several passive safety features.
Timely implementation of a programme for thorium utilisation is crucial to meet the demand for power in the next century. A small beginning has already been made. All future PHWRs are expected to use 35 bundles of thorium for initial flux flattening. This has been implemented from the KAPP (Kakrapar) reactor onwards. When plutonium recycle is started in PHWRS, it is expected that thorium will be loaded along with plutonium. Thorium had been utilised in a critical facility way back in 1972. This facility employed uranium-233 in the form of uranyl nitrate solution. Subsequently another facility was constructed to conduct physics studies on thorium lattices and used plate type fuel. In October 1996, a 30 kWth research reactor, based on thorium fuel attained criticality at IGCAR and is being used for neutron radiography.
Development of technologies for utilisation of thorium is a major challenge. It involves determination of reactor physics parameters for U233-Th system, separation of U233 from irradiated thorium, manufacturing of U233 based fuel containing small quantities of U232 having hard gamma emitting daughter products and establishing fuel specifications amenable to reprocessing.
To jump start the nuclear power programme, two boiling water reactors were set up at Tarapur near Mumbai. These reactors are still in operation. In a similar manner, in parallel to the indigenous self-reliant three-stage programme, the Nuclear Power Corporation is looking for likely sources for import of light water reactor (LWR) technology. Such imports have to conform to the latest safety standards and should be economically attractive. The recent deal with the Russian Federation for setting up two 1 000 MW units at Kudankulam in Tamil Nadu is a step in this direction. Overall it is planned to have an installed nuclear capacity of 20,000 MW by 2020 and it is envisaged that out of this 7000 MW will be based on LWR technology. So far the NPC has tied up only 2000 MW and is looking for appropriate technical and financial proposals for the remaining 5000 MW. As a long-term strategy, it will like to indigenise LWR technology.
(To be concluded)
