
NEW DELHI, JAN. 1. Uneasy lies the head that wears the crown. Capt. Devi Sharan, the pilot of the hijacked IC-814 plane, is slowly waking up to this realisation as he is bombarded with questions about the happenings at Amritsar airport on Christmas Eve.
Accorded a hero's welcome upon return to Delhi on New Year's eve and acknowledged as one by the Prime Minister, Mr. Atal Behari Vajpayee, himself, Capt. Sharan on Saturday learnt first hand that adulation comes with a price. Not for him the luxury of melting into a crowd and avoiding the glare of media.
His face splashed over all the newspapers this morning, Capt. Sharan - despite looking nothing like he did in the photographs - found himself creating a stir wherever he went on Saturday. And evidently his family - particularly his younger daughter, Aashna - was beginning to get affected by the attention.
In fact, Aashna could be seen cajoling her mother, Navneet, to get Capt. Sharan out of the clutch of mediapersons who ``gheraoed'' him as he came out of 7 Race Course Road after meeting the Prime Minister along with other hostages and their families. But it took several minutes and umpteen questions before the pilot could find his way to his car and even then he had a TV crew on his tail.
Other hostages could get away with cliched statements, but not Capt. Sharan. His initial statement expressing gratitude to Indian Airlines for giving him the training to deal with such a situation found few takers. The media wanted to know what happened in the first hours of the hijack, especially the sequence of events at Amritsar.
Unfazed by the questions, Capt. Sharan refused to be drawn into criticism of the authorities for allowing the flight to take off from Amritsar. ``The hijackers did not want to land in Amritsar in the first place. It took a considerable amount of time convincing them about the need to land there. Immobilising the plane there was not without risks as the hijackers were very panicky all the time we were in Amritsar.''
As to whether it was his decision to land in Amritsar, the pilot said there was no other option after Lahore refused permission. Refusing to say that the authorities at Amritsar airport were slow in reacting to the situation, he said ``they had very little response time''.
``They were not prepared,`` he said. ``And because we were parked on the runway, the oil bowser took time reaching the plane.''
About his conversation with Air Traffic Control (ATC) at Amritsar, he said much of what was said was under duress. And he sought to drive home the point that he could not be expected to remember each word of what transpired between him and the ATC in Amritsar.
Also, Capt. Sharan was not too sure when exactly the young honeymooner Rippan Katyal was killed. ``He was killed somewhere over Dubai because I know he was alive after we took off from Lahore.'' Asked whether the 150-odd hostages could not have overpowered the five hijackers, he shot back: ``They were armed and it was not possible to fight them without more casualties.''
Edging his way to his car, Capt. Sharan disputed reports that the aircraft had been wired with explosives and that one of the hijackers had been killed by his fellow-men. ``I was the last to leave the aircraft and I did not see anything amiss,'' he said.
Not one to find fault with the Government, Capt. Sharan refused to subscribe to the argument that exchange of militants for hostages would boost the morale of terrorists. ``We should not be thinking about that, but figuring out how to improve our own security arrangements. This does not mean Indian airports are wanting in this regard,'' said the Commander, insisting that he was as ready as ever to fly.
