
NIZAMABAD, JAN. 2. The district police have taken adequate measures to prevent any move by students' organisations to disrupt the 11th phase of the Janmabhoomi programme, beginning tomorrow and also a possible threat from the banned People's War Group naxals.
With the students' organisations deciding to intensify their stir against the Government's decision not to fill vacant posts immediately and disrupt the programme, police have been instructed to tackle the issue and take all possible measures. Organisations such as the Students Federation of India, AISF and NSUI have given a call to boycott the programme and the left wing Radical Students Union has warned that it will ask students to disrupt the meetings. Leaders of various students bodies are expected to be taken into preventive custody.
The Government has also instructed the police to watch the situation carefully and avoid any trouble. Police are also cautious about the movement of political leaders. They have devised a plan to take care of the movement of VIPs.
The Superintendent of Police, Dr. Ravi Shankar Ayyanar, has said special police parties had been deployed in all sensitive areas with bomb disposal and road-opening parties being asked to move into villages before the entry of VIPs. The Government had also given specific instructions to gunmen of the VIPs to be extra cautious when moving in crowds. Gunmen had been trained to keep a watch on all persons and restrict access to the VIP. Only after the venue of the meeting is cleared the VIP would be allowed to visit the place. A separate control room had been opened in the office of the Additional SP (Operations) to keep track of the movement of VIPs and special parties.
The district administration has also geared up to make the Janmabhoomi programme a success. According to the Chief Planning Officer, Mr. Shaik Meera, 3,472 students would fan out as 886 teams to 1,481 habitations and cover 4,99,674 projected households as part of the household survey during the first six days of the programme. On the last day of the programme, a gram sabha would be conducted where students in consultation with the villagers draw up the micro-plan for the village.
One student each has been deployed to cover up to 200 households during the human development survey. The students on the first day are being trained by Gram Panchayat resource persons as to how the survey has to be conducted before they launch the programme. Each GRP and the student would be paid Rs. 50 per day as allowance and they have been asked to stay in the villages till the conclusion of the Janmabhoomi.
This apart, the action plans for 7,880 DWCRA groups, 509 DWCUA groups, 784 CMEY groups, 341 Water users associations, 200 Vana Samarakshana Samitis and 6,219 Village Education committees, would also be prepared. He said 1,050 veterinary camps were being organised during the programme of which 310 would be exclusively held for poultry and sheep.
