
NEW DELHI, JAN. 3. Now that the wreckage of the hijack episode is being salvaged and recognisable pieces are being picked up from the debris, are the Government and its agencies addressing the priorities in the right order and with proper understanding? Some more evidence, than is available so far, is needed for an affirmative reply. The most immediate job, that does not brook even the slightest delay, is 1)to tighten security at airports and in aircraft, through fool-proof arrangements to neutralise human failings at the implementation stage and 2)to prepare to meet increased militancy in Jammu and Kashmir. In the international domain, New Delhi continues to cling to pretence diplomacy, though its bid to expose the involvement of foreign elements in the recent hijacking case and to mobilise world opinion against the crime against humanity could not be faulted. On the contrary, it needs to be encouraged.
So far, the people have not been told of the additional precautions taken to ensure the safety of air travellers, except the generalities mouthed by the Minister of State for Civil Aviation, Mr. Chaman Lal Gupta. There is a need for a clear message that the ``most hijacked airlines'' has put an end to its vulnerabilities and is geared to meeting the challenges posed by senseless but highly-motivated desperadoes. It is not necessary to make public every single step of the beefed-up security but, at the same time, unnecessary secretiveness could only detract from the effectiveness of the warning.
That the ``moral, political and diplomatic support'' to terrorists from across the border would be stepped up had become evident after the end of the Kargil conflict. The architects of the misadventure in Pakistan, it was clear, would not keep quiet in the face of the humiliation of the retreat but, instead, would seek to avenge it. This was evident from the way several points along the Line of Control in Jammu and Kashmir became live, as also from the daring attacks on the headquarters of the police and para-military forces. Normally, terrorist violence subsides in the winter because the snow-bound passes slow down the fresh influx of militants. This time, adequate preparations had been made by the militants to forestall the weather problem. New Delhi was not unaware of the new threats well before the plane tragedy but did not appear to have put together matching preparations. The hijacking case would have served a purpose if effective strategies are formulated in an all-out effort to counter the mercenaries.
The foreign connections of the terrorists, operating in Jammu and Kashmir and other areas, are not confined to Pakistan now that militants get easy sanctuaries in Afghanistan and parts of the Central Asian republics. All this calls for an international response which, as shown by the recent experience, has been far from adequate. New Delhi, thus, has to step up its campaign to ensure that the realisation of the new dangers sinks in in the minds of decision-takers in major capitals. One of the clearly recognisable pieces in the hijack episode debris is the evidence of Pakistani involvement. This supplements the circumstantial evidence, available right from the time the tragedy unfolded itself on the black Friday. The Prime Minister, Mr. Atal Behari Vajpayee, was therefore, well within his rights in urging the world community to take due note of Islamabad's role and take the required steps. However, New Delhi will be less than realistic if it pins hopes on a positive, effective response from the major powers. The U.S., which had been one of the victims of international terrorism, could play a crucial role. Will it?
India would do well not to put too much faith in the glibbery of verbal assurances. The External Affairs Minister, Mr. Jaswant Singh, is not to be denied the satisfaction of patting himself on the back every time he secures ``positive'' comments from officials in one major capital, or quotes from another. Often in the past, we noticed bouts of excitement in the foreign office over the contact of middle-level officials from New Delhi and in other capitals - Washington, to take one example.
The oft-proclaimed resolve of others for a war against international terrorism is not to be confused with support to India against the involvement of Pakistan. In the eyes of the others, trans-border terrorism may not necessarily cover the orgy of violence in Jammu and Kashmir. At times, even Pakistan is accepted as a partner in the crusade against terrorism, especially when Islamabad is seen as qualifying for this status, because of occasional concessions like the handing over of a wanted person or sharing of information. The same is the case in regard to China. We are too ready to assume that, because of its problem in Xinjiang, China would be on our side of the fence in the fight against Pakistan-sponsored terrorism. The lesson - we have to mobilise world opinion but at the same time, not delude ourself into believing that we would get the requisite support.
