
CHENNAI, JAN. 3. A prosecution witness in the case relating to `Jeeva Transport Corporation scam' during the previous AIADMK rule, today told the Special Court-I that `commission' was paid to former Transport Minister and two MDs of erstwhile JTC for procuring orders for printing presses for the supply of fare tickets to the corporation.
While the former Managing Director of JTC, Mr. Veerappan, has been cited as the main accused, the former Transport Minister, Mr. K. A. Sengottaiyan, figures as the second accused. Yet another person, Mr.`Gobi' Natarajan, has been cited the third accused in the case.
Deposing before the Special Judge-I, Mr. S. Sambandham, the witness, Mr. Murugan of Sattur, who was running a printing press, said, during chief examination, that he formed the Tamil Nadu Ticket Printers Association in May 1994, in which there were 16 members. He was made the organisation president. In July 1994, following a telephone call from the then JTC MD, Paramasivam, he met the officer when he was told that ticket printers should pay a commission to the then Transport Minister.
When he pointed out that the quotation was low and hence it was not possible to pay any commission, the official said then a higher rate could be quoted. Following a suggestion from the MD in August that letter could be addressed seeking a hike in the rate to be paid by the corporation, it was done accordingly.
As instructed by Paramasivam to collect an amount and give it to the former Minister, when he came to Erode, Rs. 1.60 lakhs was collected from ticket printers. On September 25, 1994, he was introduced by Paramasivam to the former Minister at the guest house. Out of the Rs.1.60 lakhs, he gave Rs. one lakh to the former Minister. A week later, he gave Rs. 60,000 to Paramasivam at the latter's office where the official introduced him to Mr.`Gobi' Natarajan.
The witness said it was then Mr. Natarajan told him that as he represented a big printing press, he himself could collect the commission from the ticket printers and give it to him (Natarajan).
Mr. Murugan said commission amounts were collected by the association treasurer, Mr. Velmuruganandam, from printers every month depending on the job done by them and he (Murugan) handed them over to Mr. Natarajan. Mr. Veerappan, who succeeded Mr. Paramasivam as MD, also told him that the existing practice for commission payment be continued.
The witness said the commission amounts given to Mr. Natarajan were meant for the then Minister and the Managing Directors and this practice continued for an year-and-a-half. The rate of payment by JTC was hiked from Rs. 495 per bundle of tickets to Rs. 600 and later to Rs. 760.
During cross-examination by the defence counsel, Mr. Murugan said Mr. Paramasivam introduced the former Minister to him at the guest house on September 25, 1994. He had not seen Mr. Sengottaiyan prior to that. Only after Mr. Paramasivam pointed to a person and said that he was the Minister, he gave the amount to the latter. He did not directly know that the person to whom he was introduced was the Minister. During re-examination by the prosecution, the witness said he had stated in his statement to the Magistrate that he handed over the amount to Paramasivam who in turn gave it to the Minister.
Meanwhile, another prosecution witness, Mr.Palanivelu of Karur, was allowed to be treated as hostile in the case. Though the witness said he paid commission for procuring orders for the supply of bus body kits to JTC, he was treated as hostile after he said that the handwriting in the contents of a note-book shown to him by the prosecution was not his.
