
CHENNAI, JAN. 5. The spiritual firmament has been witness to great personages in recent times who had not only realised the goal of liberation themselves but have also guided others plodding on the path. Among such spiritual masters who are indeed ``Avatarapurushas'' - come to this world with a mission - Sri Ramakrishna Paramahamsa has a worldwide following today. Though he remained for the better part of his life steeped in spiritual ecstasy, many were drawn to him and his dedicated group of disciples formed the Ramakrishna Order soon after his Mahasamadhi.
Swami Shivananda was one of his direct disciples who were instrumental in founding this Order. Even in his youth Tarak, as he was known then, was inclined towards spiritual life though he did not want to shirk his family responsibilities. So he continued to discharge his duties but persisted in his spiritual practices and longed for the guidance of a Guru. He heard of the saint of Dakshineshwar from a friend and his very name struck a responsive chord in his heart as the relationship between them was soon to blossom into that of a Guru and a disciple. In the spiritual tradition this is of great significance as this relationship is not of this life alone but one traversing several births.
In his discourse, Swami Gautamananda said that their meeting took place soon. Even during the first meeting the saint discussed about the form and formless aspects of Godhead with him and some of his doubts were cleared. When he expressed that he had a preference for meditating on the formless Absolute, Ramakrishna advised him not to entertain reservations about meditating on God's forms. This underscored the importance of not having mental predilections in spiritual life.
Another important lesson Tarak learnt when the saint urged him to stay on in the Kali temple with him so that he could devote more time to spiritual practice. Tarak told him that he had promised his friend that he would return. The saint told him that he must keep his word and taught him that truth was the highest spiritual value in this Kali yuga. He asked him to chant the Divine name especially at night.
Tarak progressed rapidly with the grace of Ramakrishna, his spiritual power having awakened by him and often had vision of God. Ramakrishna's spiritual ministry took shape in the form of the Ramakrishna Order when his close disciples renounced worldly life and the Maths at Baranagar, Belur and Almora were established after the saint's Mahasamadhi. Tarak assumed the name Shivananda and his spiritual stature can be gauged from the fact that he was addressed as Mahapurush in the Math.
