
V. Umashankar's paintings are never arrived at through the senses. They are carefully considered thematic problems, expressed in a broad vocabulary of composition, gesture and spatial metaphor. ANJALI SIRCAR profiles the artist whose works are on show in New Delhi and Mumbai.
"I do not paint a portrait to look like a subject, rather does the man grow to look like his portrait."
- Salvador Dali
V. UMASHANKAR is a painter who grapples with the unanswerable - the source of creativity, that of challenging and stimulating art - all in solitude, which makes him an interesting artist. He is a figure-painter, but does not paint from life, and his paintings are never about the specifics and particularities of a visual perception; their force comes from the embodiment and investigation of deeply-thought personal ideas, often in a reflective framework. Umashankar's paintings are never arrived at through the senses, most often they are carefully considered thematic problems, expressed in a broad vocabulary of composition, gesture and spatial metaphor.
Man has been the major concern of Umashankar's work over the years - even from his student days - and his individual style of dry pastels and acrylic on paper, bears the honest portraiture of the male creation in his myriad moods. Positioned in the highest rung of nature's ladder, man sometimes shows a surprised arrogance at being surrounded by all the elements as they rotate around him, sometimes a rebelliousness at society's attempt to enslave him, sometimes depression at being unable to achieve what he wants, and such anguished moments lead him towards solitude that might help him in his search for the intangible, for the unending path of eternal bliss.
Umashankar says: "The subject of my work is solitude, or the loneliness of man, who lives for his own self. My depiction of man was not planned. I felt that a picture would have no meaning without a human being, at the same time I did not want my work to be abstract. I began with portraits, half figures, and then came to a full figure and to balance the single figure brought in elements such as ladders, arches and elevations. You may notice that all my works are drawing-oriented - I use strong lines which outgrow the shading and colour because when you take up a line, it takes you in a particular direction, it leads you to a path."
His works are never story-oriented but based on expressions. The figures look like statues but the faces reveal multiple emotions. Man reacts to his surroundings and his postures are his statements. The paintings are almost architectonic in composition and a sense of architecture dominates space, composition, placement of figures and what cannot be seen of the landscape. The figure of the artist's painting absolutely inhabits the constructed space - the space is constructed for a reason and is inseparable from it.
The figure or grouping, whatever it maybe, appears to be alluding for no apparent or discernible reason. The artist unconsciously uses the narrative form not to put forth an anecdote but to raise questions. The paintings' characters are there not to enact the story but to try and make sense of it, and to provide an array of answers, satisfactory or not. "Solitude is my subject, in fact it is an inner quest for truth - whether what I am doing is purposeful or not. I have serious questions within my own self and I have no answers for them. I don't find any happiness in the present social conditions and my art arises out of my attitude towards society. I want to remain aloof from a society that has no genuine face, retain my individuality and develop my own self. There is a sense of freedom in what I create, and if I make a mistake, I can always retrace my step."
Any strong attitude towards life has its reciprocal weakness, and if there is real intelligence in Umashankar's approach to life, there is also a cagey guardedness, a predisposition towards loose ends. However, the uncomfortable, maybe insoluble situation is overridden by his treatment of colours - the cool blues presenting the normative scene and the hot oranges and yellows, the psychological sub-text to the non-events in his works.
While human interaction is almost absent in his ouvre, there is a lot of solitary posing, indicating a very private world where little volumes suggest certain potentials that can be activated.
The artist works on the entire surface to connect the figures to the surrounding space. If he rendered the figures directly, he might lose the cohesiveness of the composition. It is also a way to keep the painting free. "For example," says Umashankar, "I don't want to be wrapped up in worrying about the placement of figures and elements till I determine what the light source is. By working over the entire surface and often saving the figures for last, I force myself to understand and investigate the space I am dealing with. The trap I have seen many fall into time and time again is to concentrate solely on the part of the painting they are most interested in and have no idea what to do with the rest of the composition. When I find that I am getting too involved in details that are unimportant, it's time to stop and work much more vigorously on larger issues."
Umashankar needs to decide whether he wants a figure to be large, or he wants the interior elevation against which his figure is postured, to be the primary feature. "Do I want some deep space, or will I keep it shallow? How can I best communicate what I want to? Even when I am initially satisfied, I often end up cutting down or enlarging sizes, putting guidelines through horizontal and cylindrical centres and then imprint them on the paper. I believe that we all have little images in our minds from our own backgrounds and experiences, and after a while with practise, we can work out our ideas and put things together. We don't need anything but our mind."
The artist has succeeded in earning his living as a painter. "But," he points out, "I have fought the feeling that I just paint for money. I have a love affair with painting. I do it because I love it, and I won't allow anything to ruin that for me."
Born in 1972 in Chennai, Umashankar grew up in the panoramic natural surroundings of Cholamandal and enjoyed painting the floral landscapes, seascapes and beach scenes that became his signature subject even from school days. But as he grew up, he took to portraiture and semi-abstract figure painting. He completed his graduation in Fine Arts from the College of Visual Art, Gulbarga, where he found the atmosphere most congenial for the learning and absorption of art. Though he completed his course in 1999, 1997 was his watershed period when he considered himself a finished artist, with his bold lines, strong expressions and balanced compositions.
Apparao Galleries, Chennai, present the works of V. Umashankar at Triveni Kala Sangam, New Delhi, from January 1 to 15 and in Mumbai from January 2 to 30, in an attempt to unfold the millennium portrayal of "Man", and reach out a message to the world of tomorrow.
