
PONDICHERRY, JAN. 1. The former MP and secretary of the AICC(I) Mr. V. Narayanasamy, said here on Saturday that the ministry headed by Mr. R. V. Janakiraman here has been reduced to a minority as the availability of support by the TMC has become a question mark with the swift developments marked by resignation from the cabinet by Mr. C. Jayakumar (TMC) as Local Administration Minister on Thursday last.
Addressing a press conference at his residence on his return from New Delhi, Mr. Narayanasamy said the Chief Minister had virtually surrendered before the Centre without being able to resist the stand of the Centre to impose uniform sales tax for the Union Territory of Pondicherry.
He said that in the very report submitted at the meeting of Chief Ministers and Finance Ministers held on November 16 in New Delhi on behalf of the Chief Minister by an official of Pondicherry administration, it was stated that he (the Chief Minister) had no objection to the introduction of uniform floor rate of tax, provided the Centre ensured that the uniform pattern in taxes was adopted in all the States and that the Centre compensated the loss that would be entailed in the event of the new taxation system. Further, there should be no decline in the financial assistance for Union Territories. This has corroborated the fact that the Chief Minister had consented to the unioform sales tax for Pondicherry.
Mr. Narayanasamy has also said that both the Tamil Nadu Chief Minister and Union Territory Chief Minister should openly say that the support of the DMK would not be available to the Vajpyee-headed Central government any longer if the Centre imposed uniform sales tax in Pondicherry.
Mr. Narayanasamy said that the plight of the indutrialists, traders and merchants was unenviable but the Chief Minister was keeping mum or playing a drama on the sales tax issue. He said as far as the Congress(I) was concerned, it had mobilised the support and cooperation of fraternal parties and had represented to the Union Finance Minister the need to exempt Pondicherry from the new taxation pattern. Further, a detailed memorandum would be presented soon by a delegation of the Congress(I) TMC, CPI, AIADMK and CPM reiterating the stand that there should be no adoption of the new taxation.
Mr. Narayanasamy said the present ministry here had been reduced to a minority position. He said the Congress(I), AIADMK, TMC and CPI were examining the possibility of setting up an alternative government as the present ministry was in a critical condition. He said he had already called on the TMC founder, Mr. G. K. Moopanar, in Chennai on Thursday and discussed with him the current political situation in Pondicherry. He said the high command of the Congress(I) was also closely watching the situation unfolding in Pondicherry after the recent hints of the TMC and the Congress(I) coming closer in the Union Territory. The decision on the alternative government would be taken soon at the level of the high commands of the two parties, he said.
