
HYDERABAD, JAN. 2. ``I don't want you to be glum. I want to see a smile on your faces,'' was the `chief' hijacker's stern command to the passengers and the crew of the hijacked Indian Airlines Airbus.
The co-pilot of the aircraft, Mr. Rajendra Kumar Goud, said here today that the hijackers began treating them well once the plane landed at Kandahar in Afghanistan. The tension between the passengers and the hijackers eased further after three or four days and the hijackers began reciting Urdu couplets and sharing jokes. However, when the passengers started playing ``Antakshari'', their `chief' forbade them.
Describing their release from captivity as a new life, Mr. Goud said ``I am feeling great''.
Narrating the eight-day ordeal, he said every moment was filled with anxiety as nobody knew who would be killed. The passengers had told him that Rupin Katyal was killed by the hijackers for not obeying instructions.
Mr. Goud said Captain Saran, he and the Flight Engineer, Mr. Anil Jaggia, who were in the cockpit, were ``shocked when the plane was hijacked''.
``They overpowered us and hijacked the plane. We had to keep our cool and told them that we had enough fuel to go to Delhi. They were, however, not willing to land anywhere in India and said it did not matter even if it crashed anywhere, he added. He felt that security lapses at Kathmandu airport might have enabled the hijackers to board the aircraft with weapons.
Mr. Goud said when the plane landed at Amritsar, the hijackers were in full strength and made the crew move the aircraft forward and backward and veer it to right and left to ensure that nobody came near the aircraft.
``Had there been no delay in refuelling at Amritsar, the killing and injuries to the passengers wouldn't have probably happened. Though we were waiting for the fuel bowser, there was no response. The fuel bowser was kept at a distance of 200 feet from the aircraft. The hijackers were scared that some commandos might be nearing the aircraft and forced the crew to take off to Lahore'', he said.
The `chief' of the hijackers, who refused to identify himself or the place from where he hailed, mostly spoke in Hindi while the deputy chief, ``Burger'' spoke in English. ``When we asked what their demands were'', they said ``we will tell you later''. ``In fact we did not know about their demand for the release of Masood Azhar and others till the External Affairs Minister, Mr. Jaswant Singh, arrived at Kandahar'', Mr. Goud said.
After the plane reached Kandahar, the cockpit crew were ordered to sit in the cabin and the hijackers took over the cockpit.
He said the hijackers panicked when the Taliban military surrounded the aircraft on December 29.
`Happy to be alive'
In Bhopal, Mr. Bhattacharya, an Indian Forest Service (IFS) officer, said while recounting the ordeal of the hijack drama, ``I am happy that I am alive but would have been even more happy if the hijackers had been arrested''.
He and his wife, Mrs. Suchitra Bhattacharya, were among the hijacked passengers.
Mr. Bhattacharya said that the hijackers began their process of taking over when the plane was flying over Lucknow. ``Within a few minutes five masked persons armed with pistols and handgrenades took over the plane''.
- UNI
