
PUNE, JAN. 2. About 4,000 scientists, including two Nobel Laureates, are expected to participate in the 87th Indian Science Congress (ISC), which is beginning here tomorrow.
The week-long programme is being inaugurated by the Prime Minister, Mr. A. B. Vajpayee. The Nobel laureates attending the Congress are Dr. Richard Ernst of Switzerland and Dr. Jean Marie Lehn of France.
The first session of Science Congress of the new millennium is slated to address a variety of issues from the role of information technology and intellectual property rights in the 21st century, to matters relating to indigenous innovations.
A highlight of the ISC would be a global convention on why Indian scientists perform better abroad than within the country, or to put in scientifically, why do Indian genes express only in the Silcon Valley? Why not in our own Indus Valley?
Some of the best performers who had made it happen across the shores, and also some who have done so in India, are expected to attend the day-long programme. The Reserve Bank of India Governor, Dr. Biman Jalan, would set the ball rolling with a keynote address, and the discussions are slated to focus mainly on creating a real risk-taking venture capital industry.
Addressing a curtain-raiser press conference here today, the Director-General of the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), and the General President of the Science Congress, Dr. R. A. Mashelkar, said the ISC session would also feature a series of lectures by 22 outstanding Indian young scientists, who are expected to play a crucial role in science in the early part of the next century.
They would focus on the future with a special emphasis on the Indian agenda and be speaking on issues such as genomics and predictive medicine, immunology, and science and craft in vaccine development.Dr. Arun Nigavekar, Vice-Chancellor, Pune University, where the Congress is being held, said a unique feature this year was that the people of the city would be able to watch the entire programme sitting in their homes through the city's cable television network.
This would be besides the live nationwide coverage of the inaugural function on Doordarshan.
It was also announced the next Congress would be held at the Indian Agricultural Research Institute at New Delhi, with Dr. R. S. Paroda, Director-General, Indian Council of Agricultural Research, as the General President. The theme would be food, nutrition, and environmental security.
