
TIRUNELVELI, JAN. 2. Various welfare schemes being implemented by Tamil Nadu had won acclaim throughout the country, the Chief Minister, Mr. M. Karunanidhi, said today.
At a function here to inaugurate two farmers' markets (uzhavar santhai) at Palayamkottai and Tenkasi, he said the `namakku naame' scheme, `Anna marumalarchi' scheme, eye care programme, construction of concrete houses for the Adidravidas, elimination of slums, and the comprehensive health care scheme and the farmers' markets were some of the schemes which had attracted the other States. These States had sent delegations to study these programmes for launching them in their States too.
He said the farmers' markets had been set up to protect the interest of both the farmers and the consumers. He urged the farmers not to fall a prey to the tactics of middlemen and warned of stringent action against elements which attempted to exploit the innocent farmers in these markets. The district collectors had been directed to monitor the functioning of these markets closely and take steps with immediate effect to solve the grievances of the farmers.
The Agriculture Minister, Mr. Veerapandi S. Arumugam, said that though the procurement price for the agricultural produce was fixed by the Centre, the State Government had come forward to provide a bonus to the farming community.
The District Collector, Mr. K. Dhanavel, said it had been proposed to set up two more farmers' markets at Kandiyaperi and Sankarankoil soon. So far, 1,054 farmers had been given identity cards for doing business in these farmers markets.
Earlier, at another function at Nanguneri, near here, to launch the comprehensive health care scheme for the poor, Mr. Karunanidhi said much remained to be done to create an awareness on the health aspect among the rural people, particularly women.
He said this programme had already been introduced in the four districts of Tiruvallur, Tiruvannamalai, Madurai and Theni, and the response had been very encouraging. A total of 84 medical camps had been conducted in these districts in the last two months; 1.42 lakhs men, women and children were screened. About 11,700 persons had been recommended for further treatment and provided with medicines worth Rs. 8.09 lakhs. It had been proposed to conduct 8,400 medical camps to cover a population of about a crore.
The Health Minister Mr. Arcot N. Veerasamy, claimed that Tamil Nadu was the only State where every Government hospital at the taluk level possessed ultra sound scan equipment and every Government headquarters hospital had CT scan.
The District Collector said it had been proposed to conduct 384 medical camps under this scheme in the district, with 32 camps every month.
Mr. S. V. Krishnan, MLA (CPI), said that thanks to the initiative taken by the police, the illicit liquor menace had been eradicated in various villages in his Nanguneri constituency and pleaded for steps for the rehabilitation of these ex-illicit distillers.
The Law Minister, Mr. Aladi Aruna, and Dr. A.D.K. Jayaseelan, MP, also spoke.
