
CALCUTTA, JAN. 3. The official CPI(M) leadership appears to have scored a point off the dissidents by cornering them in the meeting of the party's West Bengal unit held last Friday.
Reports suggest that in that meeting, the majority of the State committee members trained their guns on the pro- changers within the CPI(M) saying the latter had flouted discipline by going to town on the party's internal affairs.
Backed by at least 80-odd members,the state committee issued showcause notice to Mr. Saifuddin Chowdhury, the former CPI(M) MP who unfurled the flag of revolt in the party a few weeks ago by questioning the leadership on issues such as inner party democracy, modernity and so on.
The party warned Mr. Subhas Chakraborty, the state transport minister and Mr. Samir Putatunda, the district secretary of North 24-Parganas.
According to the insiders in CPI(M), Mr. Chowdhury, Mr.Chakraborty and others would have generated a good deal of sympathy for them had they not spoken to the media about the intra-CPI(M) matters in a systematic manner.
``Some of the party(CPI-M) functionaries'comments in public were used by certain newspapers to conduct a malicious campaign against our party. So, the state committee has decided to discipline them,'' Mr. Anil Biswas, the party secretary said.
Mr. Chowdhury touched off a controversy in December by commenting that the CPI(M) leadership needed to change, among other things, its outlook, attitude to issues and accommodate opposing views by re-defining the concept of inner-party democracy.
Mr.Chowdhury met the Chief Minister, Mr.Jyoti Basu, along with Mr.Putatunda and explained the views of the pro- changers within the party. Mr.Basu advised them not to split the party and settle the differences amicably within the party fora. He, too, was reportedly unhappy at the way the leaders were airing their grievances in the public without caring for party discipline.
As things now stand, Mr. Chowdhury, Mr. Chakraborty and Mr. Putatunda would try to mobilise opinion in their favour from within. While many in the party support them on certain issues, indications are they would try and maintain a safe distance from them when the question of crossing the rubicon confronts them.
