
The present-day India bears a striking similarity to the 19th century British-India, at least in one respect - writings on Dalit affairs by non-Dalits. The Dalits are virtually debarred from entering into English medium education, (public/convent systems of schooling, major source of English medium education, do not subscribe to policy of reservations, and therefore, most Dalits receive education in vernacular mediums in municipal/government schools). Those who manage to learn English and wish to articulate the voice of their community, find little favour from the media-managers. This vicious cycle (of denial of English education, complemented by the hostile attitude of the press), eliminates the possibilities of Dalits' voice in the English press. However, only to maintain pretensions of being democratic, a section of the media occasionally becomes benevolent towards the Dalits, and publishes articles on their world view, their vision.
In this kind of socio-intellectual setting, any one who is comfortable with language, acquires some idea of the Dalit world, and finds the right connections, emerges an instant expert on Dalits affairs. This itself is a positive development, and we are witnessing the emergence of about half a dozen such experts, many of them well-intentioned though, commenting on Dalit affairs. While we are grateful to such scholars, who have, by their choice adopted Dalit issues, we at times feel greatly embarrassed to see our own distorted face in some of the writings. This article itself is in response to Ms. Omvedt's commentary (TheHindu, Nov. 5-6). Ms. Omvedt is fairly acquainted with the Dalit movement. But there are occasions when she fails to grasp the Dalit vision, their cultural experiences, and their idea of ``themselves''. This leads to a host of confusions, at times, amounting to mocking the Dalits' historical legacies, and their very intelligence. At the time when the Indian society is witnessing sharp polarisation, an ideological battle intensifying even further, we cannot, as responsible members of the community, leave certain formulations which present distorted pictures of our history, our movements, and of our consciousness, uncontested.
For instance, while discussing the Dalits' voting trends, author says; ``... the ``rich Dalits'', yes there are a few, vote for the BJP.'' It is indeed baffling to know that the author has invented `a few' rich Dalits, who are numerous enough to be counted in a study or a survey, and who `vote' for the BJP. To our knowledge, the only section amongst the Dalits which has a somewhat decent life and could be bracketed as `rich' are the Dalit officers. The Dalit officers are, incidentally, the most educated sections in the community, and are flag-bearers of the Ambedkar philosophy. This section is unlikely to vote for the BJP. If the author is referring to any findings of CSDA, founded by veteran scholar Prof. Rajani Kothari, then the author is making a mistake. The CSDS, a State-funded body, refuses to appoint Dalits against reserve positions, and has been promoting the agenda of the land-owning OBCs castes for decades. It is therefore only logical that the institution `finds', `a few rich' Dalits voting for the BJP. We would have agreed with the author if she had described some smaller Dalit sub-groups as BJP voters.
Ms. Omvedt, sadly though, loses sight of history when she asserts; ``... even before that there are many Dalits who expressed their humanity and aspirations within the Brahmanical framework including such famous ``poet saints'' as Chokhamela''. It is indeed ironical that the author puts Chokhamela's `humanity and aspirations' within the ``Brahmanical Framework''? Can she not see that the Chokhamela's mission was a rebellion against the Chatur-varna order, who applied ``Hindu spirituality as a ploy to articulate feelings of his people! Similar attributes are reserved for the great Bhakti Saint Ravidas. It has become a fashion among many `radical' thinkers to pick up Dalit heroes from the past, place them in the modern context, and then condemn them. Considering the ``time'' in which Chokhamela lived, and the voice he spoke in, it was a rebellion. And to do that, he had no option but to use `Hindu' spirituality as a shield.
It will not be out of place to quote Fredrick Engels, who while discussing 16th Century Europe, when ``...science had but been humble handmaid of the Church'', asserted ``...that every struggle against feudalism, at that time, had to take on a religious disguise...'' Why does Engels say so? If we apply Ms. Omvedt's yardsticks, to read pre-Revolutionary France, then we may have to debunk the entire renaissance and reformation phases of the French society, which created conditions for the Great French Revolution of 1789, one of the most celebrated events of the world history! Further, it is not for nothing that Dr. Ambedkar dedicated his famous book ``The Untouchables'' to three great Dalit saints, two of whom are Ravidas and Chokhamela. Why did Ambedkar do so? The learned author should not lose sight of the ``time'' and its relationship with ``context''. For instance, say, 50 years back, if a Dalit did not get up from his charpayee while the Rajput-landlord passed by, that act was considered heroic. The act today may carry no meaning.
The author writes: ``What seems increasing is the tendency to view almost all parties as fundamentally opposed to Dalit interests.'' While doing so, the author does not give any valid reasons why the Dalits' perception about other parties is `wrong'! Instead, she seems to hold a brief for the Congress party, when she says; ``There is a pervasive idea that the Congress itself represents the greatest and most dangerous enemy.'' To our limited knowledge, in sharp contrast to the author's `unlimited' grasp of Indian politics, we know that, of all the nine Five Year Plans, including the present ones, seven were drafted by the Congress Governments. The party has ruled India for over four decades. But what is the Dalits socio- educational profile today?
According to the 1991 census report, of the total Dalit main workforce in the countryside, about 64 per cent SCs and 36 per cent STs are landless agricultural labourers, who depend on the landlords for their sustenance. Also the majority of Dalits are illiterate. Who is to be held accountable for this pathetic state, if not the Congress? What the Congress has done in the over four decades of its rule is to restrict the Dalits to Legislative bodies and government jobs. The party during its long rule did not allow the Dalits to participate/ share in the nation's economic and intellectual activities, but simultaneously, created a facade of being custodian of Dalits interests.
To the question, ``to view almost all political parties as fundamentally opposed to Dalit interests'', we would be most grateful if the learned author can launch a project to examine the performances of various political blocks to Dalit questions. Broadly speaking, we have witnessed three models of development, scripted by three different political formulations - Congress' `liberal-socialist model, Left's socialism in Kerala and West Bengal, and Dravid parties `anti-Brahmin' model in Tamil Nadu. Most political formulations today, barring the BSP and the naxal groups, revolve around policies of these three political formulations. Assuming that the all-India position (minus figures for West Bengal, Kerala, and Tamil Nadu) of the Dalits, as reflected in official statistics, are due to the Congress rule, and compare with those of Left's and Dravidian models, we can arrive at some concrete results.
While the Congress's betrayal is well-known not much is known about the betrayals of non-Congress formulations. Not many people know that the proportion of landless labourers among the Dalits of Tamil Nadu and Kerala is much higher than the all India average for Dalits. We would feel greatly enlightened if the learned author can cite one instance where any non-Dalit formulation has ever campaigned for ending Dalits exclusion from private industry, business/commerce, public institutions, areas of education in particular, media etc. Or, in other words, have non-Congress formulations, ever argued beyond the Congress's scheme of `welfarism'?
The second part of Omvedt's article saddens us even more. How do the Dalits perceive the electoral process? The author invents newer ideas about the Dalit masses, their intelligence and their consciousness. She refers to Mr. Kanshi Ram's preference for ``unstable'' governments, and explains it. According to her; ``... for many Dalits, the election process is an end in itself. Let elections come every year, they bring opportunities to get at least some minimal rewards, some enjoyment of the fact that for once the political bosses will have to treat the Dalits politely...'' She goes on to argue; ``In fact, for under-employed rural and urban masses, the election process brings some immediate sources of income...''
What a pity! If we were to agree with the author we will have to agree that no Dalit party can ever emerge as any significant player in Indian politics, for no Dalit party can compete with the mainstream parties such as the Congress or the BJP in terms of throwing alms to `hungry' Dalit electorate, who are looking for opportunities, to barter their conscience! If the author is sincere in her remarks, then she must explain convincingly how the BSP gets over one crore votes, and how the party has successfully liberated Dalits from Congress' hold in U.P. completely, and partially in M.P., Haryana, Punjab and J&K?
While attacking the BSP, author metamorphoses virtually into a Samajvadi Party ideologue when she argues; it (BSP) seems to have no economic or cultural vision, and governmental power seems to have come down to patronage and symbolism: putting up statues of Ambedkar, getting more and more SCs in positions of power and transferring recalcitrant Brahmin officials.'' There is a pervasive idea among most non-Dalit commentators that the BSP lacks any socio-economic or cultural agenda. To this, we would like to refer to one or two things, about which, the otherwise well informed author seems to be ignorant.
The Punjab Assembly was rocked for development taking place somewhere else. The Chief Minister, Mr. Prakash Singh Badal, instituted a three-member committee. The committee members, taking into account urgency of the issue involved, were provided a helicopter, with instructions to meet U.P. Chief Minister, Ms. Mayawati and Sikh farmers of Terai region. The Terai farmers, who own huge landmass, in violation to the Ceiling Laws, were making a hue and cry that the BSP-BJP Government under Mayawati is taking away their land and distributing among Dalits. The issue had threatened the Akali-BJP alliance in Punjab, for, the excess land liberation exercise was launched by the BSP-BJP Government in U.P. The BJP was caught in a unique dilemma: the party had to either force Ms. Mayawati to stop this exercise, and thereby risk its coalition in U.P., or annoy its Akali Dal partner in Punjab, and risk coalition there. The matter was resolved through an equally unique formula worked out in Lucknow, and which remained unofficial though, that ``the excess land liberated from Sikh- farmers in Terai, will be distributed among landless Dalit- Sikhs''.
The second phase of Land Ceiling Act in U.P. had resulted in identifying 5.39 lacks acre of agricultural land as surplus, of which, only 1.49 lakh acres was distributed between 1972-'93. The land Pattas allotted to Dalits amounted to a mere 0.74 lakh acres, and of the total land distributed, about one-third remained on paper only. During Mayawati's six- month tenure, the total surplus land liberated, and actual possession accorded to the Dalits, far exceeded the total volume realised during previous two and a half decades. In fact, the Samajwadi Party's campaign against the Mayawati government had centred around twin issues: that the government is `misusing' SC/ST Atrocities Act and that by launching excess land liberation drive, and its distribution among landless, the Government is `sowing to seeds of social tension' in the State.
How can the learned author ignore such a landmark initiative of the Mayawati Government in U.P.? Land reforms apart, the Government doubled the scholarship rates of Dalit students, created over five thousand Ambedkar villages, tried to fill up vacancies reserved for SC/STs, and posted Dalit officials in crucial positions to ensure smooth implementations of the programmes she had initiated. In U.P's 50 years history, only once a Dalit became Chief Secretary, and another one, Police Chief of the State, and both the appointments were done by the Mayawati Government.
``It (BSP) seems to have no cultural vision'', so thinks the author! Let us cite one example. While laying the foundation stone for the Ambedkar park, Ms. Mayawati refused to perform Bhumi-Pujan, and snubbed all those officials who had collected the puja materials. She had then told the gathering that, in the age of science, obscurantism should not be accorded any space. Further, the Government's Parivartan Chauk in Lucknow was conceived as a memorial to the great leaders, and their messages inscribed on the central pillar, who have worked against the institution of the Varna/caste. As if all that was not enough, the author delivers the final blow on the Dalits' sensibilities, when she talks of `their quota, `short-term populism.' She argues, ostensibly in the Dalits' defence, that; ``When ministries are distributed as party quotas and not on political merit, the Dalits can be hardly blamed for trying to focus on getting ``their'' quota''. She further adds; ``- the Dalits can hardly blamed for pushing their own short-term populism.''
By venturing into ``quota'' and ``populism'' aspects, the author, instead of resolving, complicates issues even more. How can the ``party quota'' in the age of coalition be compared with Dalits quota, enshrined in the Constitution to ensure ``Representation'' of a social block, hitherto excluded from the system of governance.
Similarly, how can the term `populism' carry any meaning for a people of diverse social settings? For instance, subsidy on cooking gas, a classical example of populism, has no economic rational, but continues only to keep the middle class in good humour. If it is withdrawn, but retained for the Dalit consumers, on behest of say, some Dalit representatives, it may sound a `Dalit Populism.' But the facts may tell a different story. A Dalit family, using cooking gas, in all likelihood, may have only one member decently employed, and in all likelihood, may have no additional sources of income. Thus the money saved because of subsidy, may be subsiding children's education.
There is a growing tendency amongst non-Dalit scholars to talk of Dalit rights rather passionately, but at the same time, debunk their movements and leadership. This has happened with the Nirgun Branch of the Bhakti Movement, and repeated during Ambedkar's movement. Once the movement fades, and the leaders depart, the same movement is glorified, and the leaders and eulogised. The same thing is happening now. There are people who are supportive of the Dalits' cause, but are relentlessly debunking their movement and the leadership. Dalits are keen learners, so teach us, that is alright, but learn as well. In every learner, there is an invisible teacher.
CHANDRA BHAN PRASAD
President, Dalit Shiksha Andolan
Dr. SHEORAJ SINGH BECHAIN
Convenor, Dalit Writers' Forum
