
JAMMU, JAN. 2. Including the former chief of Al Umar Mujahideen, Mushtaq Ahmed Zargar, in the list of militants whose release was demanded by the hijackers of Indian Airlines flight is significant in many ways. It was to give the hijacking a Kashmir colour and internationalise the issue, says observers.
In what is seen as a rejuvenated effort to involve Kashmiris in the ``armed struggle'' more effectively, the as yet unidentified hijackers but said to be from the Pan-Islamic group Harkatul Mujahideen which, however, has denied involvement - asked for Zargar, the most wanted militant commander in the early days of militancy. He had created terror in downtown Srinagar and kept the paramilitary forces on tenterhooks for two years prior to his arrest in 1992.
The security forces would become ``nervous'' hearing about his presence in their area as he was reported to be holding two guns at a time hitting his target ``effectively.''
Even as the militants are in upbeat mood over Zargar's release, his mother is unhappy with the development. ``How can I feel glad as now he is far away from my eyes and heart,'' Ms. Salima, the 60-year-old widow told a local newspaper. ``Is it now possible to meet, here we used to go to central jail and meet him,'' she said. She is worried about his safety: ``We do not know who were the hijackers and where he is now.'' His brother Zahoor said, ``Celebrations are for Masood's and the other militant's family, not for us. I am sure he cannot step into Kashmir again,'' the daily quoted him as saying.
Many questions are asked why Zargar's release was demanded. According to an analyst, this was aimed at giving the crisis a ``Kashmir colour' so that it could be internationalised. However, it is not ruled out that the planners behind the hijack might have sought his (Zargar's) approval much earlier through his relatives and friends who would meet him in the jail. ``He could have otherwise refused to come out of the jail,'' said a senior official asserting that he was ``committed to his cause.'' But it is also a fact that Zargar would not know any of the militant organisations such as the Harkat-ul-Ansar or Lashkar-i-Taiba, which came into existence much after his arrest.
Those dealing with militancy in Kashmir feel that this is a signal for a different phase of insurgency. In fact, the foreign militants who have taken control in Kashmir have realised that without the involvement of the locals the desired results could not be achieved. This is despite the fact, Pakistan and its ISI were ``disillusioned'' with the locals. But with the passage of time, militants such as Zargar are being roped in.
Authorities here feel that there is an attempt across the border to get all those militant leaders who are in Pakistan-Occupied- Kashmir and Pakistan under one roof and devise new strategies and for that Mushtaq Zargar is certainly a ``big catch.''
