
IT'S Y2K. And the portals of Indian art and music are all set to go global. Eyeing a diaspora of Carnatic music lovers round the globe, through the `windows' of the Internet, more and more people are pulling up their mouse-pads, hoping to cash in on the home-bred art.
www.carnaticmusic.com maintained by Satyam Online was one of the earliest players. A site for purists, it offers not just news and features on Carnatic music, but also has a `Hall of Fame' and `Know Carnatic' section, that are very academic in nature.
The site also contains artiste profiles and hosts live chats with the artistes during the season. During the off-season time, however, there's not much action on the site. However, the site has an interesting audio gallery.
www.chennaionline.com/musicseason99, which is an off-shoot of the Chennai portal on the net, is a seasonal link. It does contain updates and reviews of the music season, apart from audio and video clips. The latest to venture into cyberspace is the Mylapore Times' own www.kutcheribuzz.com that is looking at providing Carnatic music lovers across the world a ``feel of home,'' around-the-year, not just during the music season.
The Mylapore Times first started out with a `Kutcheri Buzz Guide' to the music festival. ``It's a landmark. The festival has been on for ages and hasn't been showcased. Moreover, it is the tourist season here between December and February. We saw a wonderful opportunity to tap tourists. Abroad, there are survival kits and guides for every festival,'' Mr. Vincent D'Souza, Editor of the Mylapore Times, explains how it all started.
Finding the guide gain immense popularity, the group wanted to ``bring the season alive.'' Understanding the limitation of one guide, the Mylapore Times came out with a daily free newspaper on the music season titled `Kutcheri Buzz' circulated through the sabhas.
And once they had more people asking for the same data, the internet version www.kutcheribuzz.com came up in December, in association with PPP India.
Quick to figure out what they would do at the end of the season, the team decided to make the portal a `World Stage' for Carnatic Music and a `Window to Madras.' ``All round-the-year, we have concerts happening in different parts of the world. The artistes have been really excited about this and, hence, we will get the news at source, every time they go for concerts abroad. And we will have people from round-the-world telling us how the concert was,'' Ms. K. Nitya Kalyani of `Kutcheri Buzz' says.
The print version, however, would come out once a month during the off-season.
Music sites on the net are a common phenomenon abroad. Thanks to several audio compression formats now available, easy connectivity and faster download speeds abroad, websites such as www.classicalmusic.com are able to make the most of multimedia.
It's a long way to go for Indian sites - Chat applets and video clips not just require a lot of expensive `space' in digital terms, they also take quite a long while to load, in the Indian context due to poor cable capacities, bandwidth and congestion.
Such sites aim to help the expatriate community link up and make the most of the visit of Carnatic musicians abroad, by arranging last- minute trips and concerts even after the guest has arrived in the foreign land.
(By Sudhish Kamath)
