
CHENNAI, JAN. 1. Except for a locked crane onboard a Japanese ship at the Chennai port, all computer-dependent vital sectors in the State have survived the Y2K glitch without a scratch.Early reports from the public and private sectors indicated that there were no hitches in the millennium roll-over. But the picture will be clearer only after January 3 when banks and commercial establishments will recommence transactions.
``We did not receive a single worthwhile complaint,'' said Mr. C.S.R. Prabhu, State Informatics Officer, National Informatics Centre (NIC). NIC had set up two central control rooms in Chennai to oversee the millennial transition of 11 vital sectors.
The control room set up by the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) in Chennai for the private sector also did not receive any reports of the year-end hiccup. ``The feedback shows that the transition was smooth,'' said Mr. Arun Kumar, IT specialist, CII.
Reports from banking, transport, port, railways, oil, space and electricity sectors all over the State said the transition happened without a blink. In telecommunication, the two huge public sector operators, the Chennai Telephones and the Videsh Sanchar Nigam Limited in Chennai, also did not encounter any problem. ``The roll-over was very smooth,'' said Mr. C. V. Rajan, Chief General Manager, Chennai Telephones.
The only exception to the success-story was a Japanese bulk carrier ``Young Ann-II,'' which was anchored at the Chennai Port. The in- built crane of the ship, which was discharging cargo meant for Madras Fertilisers Limited, halted at the stroke of midnight following the failure of a computer that measured the weight of the cargo. The Port authorities immediately provided a crane to continue the job.
The Port, however, claimed ``record productivity'' on the day. It went through the roll-over period handling 218 containers per gantry crane per three-hour shift from a vessel as against the average of 100 containers. ``The hourly productivity of 27 moves achieved by the Port on December 31 equals the productivity of leading international ports,'' said Mr. P. Bhaskardoss, Chairman.
In Coimbatore, heads of sectors such as telecom, airport, insurance, banking and posts said the transition was hassle- free.The victory over the ``Y2K bug'' has been attributed to advance preparedness taken by all vital sectors in the State. The Public Sector giant, BHEL in Tiruchi, had taken necessary steps a year back and achieved compliance in October itself. According to Mr. V. K. Gopinath, Chief Executive, BHEL, during the roll-over period, about 200 engineers were put on duty to ensure that there were no last minute hitches.
The Tuticorin port, one of the 11 major ports in the country, also did not face any problem during the transition. From December 25, the Port had started receiving Y2K-related information from all ships which were calling at the port.
The Southern Railway had to achieve Y2K compliance at least two months in advance as it had to issue tickets for dates beyond January 1, 2000, said Mr. N. Krithivasan, General Manager. Trial charts for January 1 were prepared on November 2 itself. Other than the massive reservation system which handled nearly four lakh passengers every day, the Railways had largescale use of computerisation in several other departments. All systems including processor-based devices for regulating and despatching the trains also did not face any problem as the world slipped into the next millennium.
